# Character Sets and Collations

A character set is a mapping from binary encodings to a defined set of symbols; you can think of it as how to represent a particular alphabet in bits. A collation is set of sorting rules for a character set. MySQL's support for character sets and collations is very full-featured, but it can add complexity, and in some cases it has a performance cost.

## How MySQL uses character sets

Character sets can have several collations, and each character set has a default collation. Collations belong to a particular character set and cannot be used with any other.

MySQL has a variety of options that control character sets. The options and the character sets are easy to confuse, so keep this distinct in mind: only character-based values can truly "have" a character set. Everything else is just a setting that specifies which character set to use for comparisons and other operations.

MySQL's settings can be divided into two classes: defaults for creating objects and settings that control how the server and the client communicate.

### Settings for client/server communication

When the server and the client communicate with each other, they might send data back and forth in different character sets. 

- The server assumes the client is sending statements in the character set specified by character_set_client. 
- After the server receives a statement from the client, it translates it into the character set specified by character_set_connection.
- When the server returns results or error message back to the client, it translates them into character_set_result.

You can use the SET NAMES statement and/or the SET CHARACTER SET statement to change these three settings as needed. However, note that this command affects only the server's settings. The client program and the client API also need to be set correctly to avoid communication problems with the server.

Suppose you open a client connection with latin1 (the default character set, unless you've used mysql_options() to change it) and then use SET NAMES utf8 to tell the server to assume the client is sending data in UTF-8. You've created a character set mismatch, which can cause errors and even security problems. You should set the client's character set and use mysql_real_escape_string() when escaping values.

### How MySQL compare values

When MySQL compares two values with different character sets, it must convert them to the same character set for the comparison. If the character sets aren't compatible, this can cause an error, such as "ERROR 1267 (HY00): Illegal mix of collations."

## Choosing a Character Set and Collation

A mixture of character sets in your database can be a real mess. Incompatible character sets tend to be terribly confusing. They might even work find until certain characters appear in your data.

The most common choices for collations are whether letters should sort in a case sensitive or case-insensitive manner, or according to the encoding's binary value. The collation names generally end with _cs, _ci or _bin, so you can tell which is which easily. The different between case-sensitive and binary collations is that binary collations sort according to the byte values of the characters, whereas case-sensitive collations might have complex sorting rules such as those those regrading multiple characters in language.