# How MySQL Uses Indexes

Most MySQL indexes (PRIMARY KEY, UNIQUE INDEX, and FULLTEXT) are stores in B-trees. Memory tables also support hash indexes; InnoDB use inverted lists for FULL TEXT indexes. 

MySQL uses indexes for these operations:

- To find the rows matching a WHERE clause quickly.
- To eliminate rows from consideration. If there is a choice between multiple indexes, MySQL normally uses the index that finds the smallest number of rows.

## 8.3.2. Primary Key Optimization

The primary key for a table represents the column or set of columns that you use in your most vital queries. It has an associated index, for fast query performance. Query performance benefits from the NOT NULL optimization, because it cannot include any NULL values. With the InnoDB storage engine, the table data is physically organized to do ultra-fast lookups and sorts based on the primary key or columns.  

## 8.3.3. SPATIAL Index Optimization

## 8.3.4. Foreign Key Optimization

If a table has many columns, and you query many different combinations of columns, it might be efficient to split the less-frequently used data into separate tables with a few columns each, and relate back to the main table by duplicating the numeric ID column from the main table.

## 8.3.5. Column Indexes

The B-tree data structure lets the index quickly find a specific value, a set of values, or a range of values, corresponding to operators such as =, >, <=, BETWEEN, IN, and so on, in a WHERE clause.

### 8.3.5.1. Index Prefixes

With col_name(N) syntax in an index specification for a string column, you can create an index that use only the first N characters of the column. Indexing only a prefix of columns values in this way can make the index file much smaller. When you create index a BLOB or TEXT column, you must specify a prefix length for the index. 

```sql
CREATE TABLE test(blob_col BLOB, INDEX(blob_col(10)));
```

#### 8.3.6. Multiple-Column Indexes

MySQL can create composite indexes (that is, indexes on multiple columns). An index may consist of up to 16 columns.

As an alternative to composite index, you can introduce a column that is "hashed" based on information from other columns. If this column is short, reasonably unique, and indexes, it might be faster that a "wide" index on many columns. 

Suppose that a table has following specifications:

```sql
CREATE TABLE tests (
    id INT NOT NULL,
    last_name CHAR(30) NOT NULL,
    first_name CHAR(30) NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (id),
    INDEX name (last_name, first_name)
);
```
The name index is an index over the last_name and first_name columns. The index can be used for lookups in queries that specify values in a known range for combinations of last_name and first_name values. It can also be used for queries that specifies just a last_name value because that column is a leftmost prefix of the index. 

Therefore, the name index is used for lookups in the following queries: 

```sql
select * from tests where last_name = 'Jones' :

select * from tests where last_name = 'Jones' and first_name = 'John';

select * from tests where last_name = 'Jones' and (first_name = 'John' or first_name = 'Joh');

select * from tests where last_name = 'Jones' and first_name >= 'M' and first_name < 'N';
```

However, the name index is not used for lookups in the following queries

```sql
select * from tests where first_name = 'John';

select * from tests where last_name = 'John' or first_name = 'John';
```
Suppose that u issue the following SELECT statement: 

```sql
SELECT * FROM tbl_table
    WHERE col1=val1 AND col2=val2;
```

If a multiple-column index exists on col1 and col2, the appropriate rows can be fetched directly. If separate single-column indexes exist on col1 and col2, the optimizer attempts to  use the Index Merge optimization, or attempts to find the most restrictive index by deciding which index excludes more rows and using that index to fetch the rows.

If the table has a multiple-column index, and leftmost prefix of the index can be used by the optimizer to look up rows. For example, if you have a three-column index on (col1, col2, col3), you have  indexes seach capabilities on (col1), (col1, col2) and (col1, col2, col3).

MySQL cannot use the index to perform lookups if the columns do not form a leftmost prefix of the index. Suppose that you have the SELECT statements shown here 

```sql
select * from tbl_name where col1=val1; 
select * from tbl_name where col1=val1 and col2=val2;

select * from tbl_name where col2=val2;
select * from tbl_name where col2=val2 and col3=val3;
```

If an index exists on (col1, col2, col3), only the first two queries use the index. The third and fourth queries do involve indexes columns, but do not use an index to perform lookups because (col2) and (col2, col3) are not leftmost prefixes of (col1, col2, col3).