# Web server: Apache, Nginx

## 1. Web server [link](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_web_server)

### 1.1. Prerequires

#### How the Internet works [link](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/How_does_the_Internet_work)

The Internet is the backbone of the Web, the technical infrastructure that makes the Web possible. At its most basic, the Internet is a large network of computers which communicate all together.

When to computers need to communicate, you have to link them, either physically or wirelessly. All modern computers can sustain any of those connections.

Each computer on a network is connected to a special tiny computer called a router. To send a message to computer B, computer A must send the message to the router, which in turn forwards the message to computer B and makes sure the message is not delivered to computer C. (Each is called network topology).

But what about connecting hundreds, thousands, billions of computers? Of course a single router can't scale that far. Router is a computer like any other, so what keeps us from connecting two routers together?

To send messages from our network to the network we want to reach. We will connect our network to an Internet Service Provider (ISP). An ISP is a company that manages some special routers that are all linked together and can also access other ISP's routers. So the message from our network is carried through the network of ISP networks to the destination network.

If you want to send a message to a computer,  you have to specify which one. Thus any computer linked to a network has a unique addess that identifies it, called "IP address".

Intranets are private networks that are restricted to members of a particular organization. They are commonly used to provide a portal for members to securely access shared resources, collaborate and communicate.

Extranets are very similar to Intranets, except they open all or part of a private network to allow sharing and collboration with other organizations. 

Refences:

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_LPdttKXPc
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x3c1ih2NJEg

#### Understand the difference between a web page, a website, a web server, and a search engine [link](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/Pages_sites_servers_and_search_engines)

**Web page** A **document** which can be displayed in a web browser such as Firefox, Google Chrome, Opera, Microsoft Edge, or Apply Safari. These are also often called just "pages".

**Website** A collection of web pages which are grouped together and usually connected together in various ways. Often called a "website" or a site.

**Web server** A computer that hosts a website on the Internet.

**Search engine** A web service that helps you find other web pages, such as Google, Bing, Yahoo, or DuckDuckGo. Search engine are normally accessed though a web browser.

### 1.2. Objective

You will learn what a web server is and gain a general understanding of how it works

### 1.3. TLDR;

Refer to hardware or software, or both

1. On the hardware side, a computer that stores web server software and a website's component files (HTML documents, images, CSS, and JS files). A web server connects to the internet and supports physical data interchange with other devices connected to the web.

2. On the software side, a web server includes several parts that control how web users access hosted files. At a minimum, this is an HTTP server. An HTTP server is software that understands URLs(web address) and HTTP.

To publish a website, you need either a static or a dynamic web server.

A **static web server**, or stack, consists of a computer (hardware) with an HTTP server (software). We call it "static" because the server sends its hosted files as-is to your browser.

A **dynamic web server** consists of a static web server plus extra software, most commonly an application server and a database. We call it "dynamic" because the application server updates the hosted files before sending content to your browser via the HTTP server.

## 2. Apache web server [link](https://httpd.apache.org/)

The Apache HTTP Server, commonly referred to as Apache, is one of the most widely used and popular open-source web server software programs in the world. Apache is designed to serve web content, including HTML files, images, scripts, and more, to client over the internet.

## 3. Nginx web server [link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7VAI73roXaY)
