# Rest API, HTTP, Network

## HTTP

## Network

### OSI (Open System Internet) model

1. Physical Layer (Hubs)
The physical layer is the bottom-most layer. It is responsible for transmitting raw bits of data across a physical connection.

2. Data Link Layer (ARP, VLAN, STP)
The data link layer is the second layer. It takes the raw bits from the physical layer and organizes them into frames. It ensures that the frames are delivered to the correct destination.

MAC header | IP header | TCP header | HTTP header | Data

3. Network Layer (IP, ICMP, IPSec)
It is responsible for routine data frames across different networks. The IP part of TCP/IP is a well-known example of this layer.

4. Transport Layer (TCP UDP...)
Handles end-to-end communication between two nodes. TCP provides reliable, end-to-end communication between devices. It does this by dividing the data into small, manageable segments and sending each segment individually. Each segment has a sequence number attached to it. The receiving end uses the sequence numbers to reassemble the data in the correct order.

UDP is another popular protocol in the transport layer. It is similar to TCP, but it is simpler and faster. Unlike TCP, UDP doesn't provide the same level of error-checking and reliability. It simply sends packets of data from one device to another. The receiving end is responsible for determining whether the packets were received correctly. If an error is detected, the receiving end simply discards the packet.

5. Session Layer
6. Presentation Layer
7. Application Layer (SMTP HTTP FTP HTTPS P2P DNS)

Session Layer, Presentation Layer and Application Layer => application protocols.

### Web Socket

The WebSocket API is an advanced technology that makes it possible to open a two-way interactive communication session between the user's browser and a server. With this API, you can send messages to a server and receive event-driven responses without having to poll the server for a reply.

**WebSocket**

The primary interface for connecting to a WebSocket server and then sending and receiving data on the connection.

**CloseEvent**

The event sent by the WebSocket object when the connection closes

**MessageEvent**

The event sent by the WebSocket object when a message is received from the server.

