# Memory Layouts

Type alignment and size guarantees in Go. It is essential to know the guarantees to estimate the sizes of struct types and properly use the 64-bit functions in async/atomic standard package.

## Type alignment guarantees in Go

To fully utilize CPU directives and get the best performance, the starting addresses of the memory blocks allocated for values of a specified type must be aligned as multiples of an integer N. Then N is called the alignment guarantee of the type. We can also say the addresses of addressable values of the type are guaranteed to be N-byte aligned.

In fact, each type has two alignment guarantees, one is for when it is used as field types of struct types, the other is for other cases (when it is used for a variable declaration, array element type). One is the field alignment guarantee of that type, and one is the general alignment guarantee of that type.

For a type T, we can call unsafe.Alignof(t) to get its general alignment guarantee, where t is a non-field value of type T, and call unsafe.Alignof(x.t) to get its field aligment guarantee, where x is a struct value and t is a field value of type T.

Call to the functions in the unsafe standard code packages are always evaluated at compile time. 

At runtime, for a value t of type T, we can call reflect.Typeof(t).Align() to get the general alignment guarantee of type T, and call reflect.TypeOf(t).FieldAlign() to get the field alignment guarantee of type T.

**The following minimal  alignment properties are guaranteed**

1. For a variable x of any type: unsafe.Alignof(x) is at least 1
2. For a variable x of struct type:  unsafe.Alignof(x) is the largest off all the values unsafe.Alignof(x.f) for each field f of x, but at least 1.
3. For a variable x of array type: unsafe.Alignof(x) is the same as the alignment of a variable of tyhe array's element type.

Go specification doesn't specify the exact alignment guarantees for any types. It just specifies some minimal requirements. For the same compiler, the exact type alignment guarantees may be different different architectures and between different compiler versions.

Go Go1.20 the alignment guarantees are listed here

|type|alignment guarantee|
|-|-|
|bool, uint8, int8|1|
|uint16, int16|2|
|uint32, int32|4|
|float32, complex64|4|
|arrays|depend on element types|
|structs|depend on field types|
|other types|size of a native word|

Here the size of a native work (or machine word) is 4-byte on 32-bit architectures and 8-byte on on 64-bit architectures.

## Type sizes and structure padding

|type|size in bytes|
|-|-|
|uint8, int8|1|
|uint16, int16|2|
|uin32, int32, float32|4|
|uint64, int64|8|
|float64, complex64|8|
|complex128|16|
|uint, int|implementation-specific, generally 4 on 32-bit architectures, and 8 on 64-bit architectures|
|uintprt|implementation-specific large enough to store the uninterpreted bits of a pointer value|

The following is an example showing how bytes are padded between struct fields. We have already learned that.

- The alignment guarantee and size of the built-in type int8 are both one byte
- The alignment guarantee and size of the built-in type int64 are both two bytes
- The size of the built-in type int64 is 8 bytes, the alignment guarantee of type int64 is 4 bytes on 32-bit architectures and 8 bytes on 64-bit architectures.
- The alignment guarantees of the types T1 and T2 are their respective largest field alignment

```go
// T1 ...
type T1 struct {
	a int8
	// On 64-bit architectures, to make field b 8-byte aligned, 7 bytes need to be padded here
	// On 32-bite architectures, to make field b 4-byte aligned, 3 byes need to be padded here
	b int64
	c int16
	// To make the size of type T1 be a multiple of the alignment guarantee of T1
	// On 64-bit architectures, 6 bytes need to be padded here, on 32-bit architecture,
	// 2 bytes need to be padded here
}

// T2 ...
type T2 struct {
	a int8 // 1 byte align
	// On 64-bit architectures, to make field c 2-byte aligned, one byte needs to be padded here on both 64-bit
	// and 32-bit architectures.
	c int16 // 2 byte align
	// On 64-bit architectures, to make field b 8-byte aligned, 4 bytes need to be padded
	// here.  On 32-bit architectures, field b is already 4-byte aligned, so no bytes need to be padded here.
	b int64
}

func main() {
	t1 := T1{}
	fmt.Println(unsafe.Sizeof(t1), unsafe.Alignof(t1.c)) // 1 + 7 + 8 + 2 + 6
	t2 := T2{}
	fmt.Println(unsafe.Sizeof(t2)) // 1 + 1 + 2 + 4 + 8
}
```

Although T2 and T2 have the same field set, their sizes are different.

One interesting fact for the standard Go compiler is that sometimes zero sized fields may affect structure padding.

## The alignment requirement for 64-bit word atomic operations

64-bit words mean values of types whose underlying types are int64 or uint64.
