# 3. An informal introduction to Python

## 3.1. Using Python as a Calculator

**Numbers**

The integer numbers have type int, the ones with a fractional part (5.0, 1.6) have type float. We will see more about numeric types later in the tutorial.

Division / always returns a float. To do floor division and get an integer result you can use the // operator to calculate the remainder you can use %

```py
print(17 / 3)
print(17 // 3)
print(17 % 3)
print((17 // 3) * 3 + 17 % 3)
```

With Python, it is possible to use the ** operator to caculate powers:

```py
print(5**2) # 5 squared
print(2**7) # 2 to the power of 7
```

**Text**

Python can manupulate text (represented by type str, so-called strings) as well as numbers.

String literals can span multiple lines. One way is using triple-quotes """

String can be concatenated (glued together) with the + operator, and repeated with *:

```py
3* 'un' + 'um'
```

Indices may also be negative numbers, to start counting from the right:

```py
word[-1] # word[len - 1]
word[-2] # word[len - 2]
```

Slice indices have useful defaults: an omitted frist index defaults to zero, an omitted second index defaults to the size of the string being sliced.

```py
word[:2]
word[:4:]
word[-2:]
```

Python strings cannot be changed - they are immutable. Therefore, assigning to an indexed position in the string results in an error:

```py
word[0] = 'J'
>>> TypeError
word[2:] = 'Py'
>>> TypeError
```

If you need a different string, you should create a new one:

```py
'J' + word[1:]
word[:2] + 'py'
```

**See also**

Reference
Library

### Lists

Python knows a number of compound data types, used to group together other values. The most versatile is the list, which can be written as a list of comma-separated values (items) between square brackets. Lists might contain items of different types, but usually the items all have the same type.

Like strings (all all other built-in sequence types), lists can be indexed and sliced:

```py
squared[0]
squared[-1]
squared[-3:]
```

All slice operations return a new list containing the requested elements. This means that the following slice returns a shallow copy of the list:

```py
squares[:]
```

Lists also support operations like concatenation:

```py
squares + [36, 49, 64, 81, 100]
[1, 4, 9, 15, 25, 36, 49, 64,  81, 100]
```

Unlike strings, which are immutable, lists are a mutable type, i.e it is possible to change their content:

```py
cubes = [1, 8, 27, 65, 125]
cubes[3] = 64
print(cubes)
```

You can also add new items at the end of the list, by using the list.append() method (we will see more about methods later):

```py
cubes.append(216)
cubes.append(7**3)
print(cubes)
```

Assignment to slices is also possible, and this can even change the size of the list or clear it entirely:

```py
letters = ["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g"]
print(letters)
letters[2:5] = ["C", "D", "E"]
print(letters)
letters[2:5] = ["C", "D"]
print(letters)
letters[2:5] = []
print(letters)
```

## 3.2. First steps towards programming

**Notes**

- Since ** has higher precedence thatn -, -3**2 will be interpreted as -(3**2) and thus result in -9. To avoid this and get 9, you can use (-3)**2 
- Unlike other languages, special characters such as \n have the same meaning with both single ('')  and double "" quotes. The only difference between the two is that within single quote you don't need to escape " but you have to escape \' and vice versa.
