# More control flow

As well as the while statement just introduced, Python uses a few more that we will encounter in this chapter.

```py
x = int(input("Please enter an integer: "))
if x < 0:
    x = 0
    print("Negative changed to zero")
elif x == 0:
    print("Zero")
elif x == 1:
    print("Single")
else:
    print("More")
```

Python's for statement iterates over the items of any sequence (a list or a string), in the order that they appear in the sequence.

```py
words = ["cat", "window", "defenestrate"]

for w in words:
    print(w, len(w))
```

Code that modifies a collection while iterating over that same collection can be tricky to get right. Instead, it is usually more straight-forward to loop over a copy of the collection or to create a new collection.

```py
users = {"Hans": "active", "Hu": "inactive"}

for user, status in users.copy().items():
    if status == "inactive":
        del users[user]

active_users = {}
for user, status in users.items():
    if status == "active":
        active_users[user] = status

print(users, active_users)
```

## The range() Function

To iterate over the indices of a sequence, you can combine range() and len() as follows:

```py
a = ["a", "b", "c", "d"]
for i in range(len(a)):
    print(i, a[i])
```


## Break and continue Statements, and else Clauses on Loops

The break statement breaks out of the innermose enclosing for or while loop

A for or while loop can include an else clause.

In a for loop the else clause is executed after the loop reaches its final iteration.

```py
for n in range(2, 10):
    for x in range(2, n):
        if n % x == 0:
            print(n, "equals", x, "*", n // x)
            break
    else:
        print(n, "is a prime number")
```

The else clause belongs to the for loop, not the if statement.

When used with a loop, the else clause has more in common with the else clause of a try statement than it does with that of if statements: a try statement's else clause runs when no exception occurs, and a loop's else clause run when no break occurs.

The continue statement, also borrowed from C, continues with the next iteration of the loop:

```py
for num in range(2, 10):
    if num % 2 == 0:
        print("Found an even number", num)
        continue
    print("Found an odd number", num)
```

## pass Statements

The pass statement does nothing. It can be used when a statement is required syntactically but the program requires no action.

```py
while True:
    pass

class MyEmptyClass:
    pass

def initlog(*args):
    pass
```

## match statements

```py
def http_error(status):
    match status:
        case 400:
            return "Bad Request"
        case 404:
            return "Not found"
        case 418:
            return "I'm a teapot"
        case _:
            return "Something's wrong with the internet"
```

The last block: the variable name _ acts as a wildcard and never fails to match. If no case matches, none of the branches is executed.

You can combine several literals in a single pattern using | ("or"):

```py
case 401 | 403 | 404:
    return "Not allowed"
```

Patterns can look like unpacking assignments, and can be used to bind variables:

```py
match point:
    case (0, 0):
        print("Origin")
    case (0, y):
        print(f"Y={y}")
    case (x, 0):
        print(f"X={x}")
    case (x, y):
        print(f"X={x}, Y={y}")
    case _:
        raise ValueError("Not a point")
```

```py
def fib(n):
    """Print a Fibonacci series up to n."""
    a, b = 0, 1
    while a < n:
        print(a, end=" ")
        a, b = b, a + b
    print()


fib(10)
```

The first statement of the function body can optionally be a string literal; this string literal is the function's documentation string, or docstring. (More about docstrings can be found in the section Documentation Strings.) There are tools which use docstrings to automatically produce online or printed documentation, or to let the user interactivey browse through code.

The execution of a function introduces a new symbol table used for the local variables of the function. More precisely, all variable assignments in a function store the value in the local symbol tables of enclosing functions, then in the global symbol table, and finally in the table of built-in names. Thus, global variables and variables of enclosing functions cannot be directly assigned a value within a function (unless, for global variables, named in a global statement, or for variables of enclosing functions, named in a nonlocal statement)

The actual parameters (arguments) to a function call use introduced in the local symbol table of the called function when it is called; thus, arguments are passed using call by value (where the value is always an object reference, not the value of the object).

Coming from other languages, you might object that fib is not a function but a procedure since it doesn't return a value. In fact, even functions without a return statement do return a value, albeit a rather boring one. This value is called None (it's a built-in name).Writing the value None is normally suppressed by the interpreter if it would be the only value written.

```py
def greeting() -> None:
    print("hello")


print(greeting())
```

Some Python features:

- The return statement return with a value from a function. return without an expression argument returns None. Falling off the end of a function also returns None.
- The statement result.append(a) calls a method of the list object result.

## Default argument values

The most useful form is to specify a default value for one or more arguments. This creates a function that can be called with fewer argument than it is defined to allow

```py
def ask_ok(prompt, retries=4, reminder="Please try again!") -> bool:
    while True:
        ok = input(prompt)
        if ok in ("y", "yes"):
            return True
        if ok in ("n", "no"):
            return False
        retries = retries - 1
        if retries < 0:
            raise ValueError("invalid user response")
        print(reminder)


print(ask_ok(prompt="Enter y/yes/n/no: ", retries=10))
```

The default values are evaluated at the point of function definition in the defining scope, so that:

```py
i = 5

def f(arg=i):
    print(arg)

i = 6
f() # 5
```

**Important warning:** The default value is evaluated only once. This makes a difference when the default is a mutable object such as a list, dictionary, or instances of most classes. For example, the following function accumulates the arguments passed to it on subsequent calls:

```py
def f(a, L: list = []) -> list:
    L.append(a)
    return L


print(f(1))
print(f(2))
print(f(3))
```

This will print

```txt
[1]
[1, 2]
[1, 2, 3]
```

If you don't want the default to be shared between subsequent calls, you can write the function like this instead:

```py
def f(a, L: list = None) -> list:
    if L is None:
        L = []
    L.append(a)

    return L


print(f(1))
print(f(2))
print(f(3))
```

## Keyword Argument

Functions can also be called using keyword arguments of the form kwarg=value.

```py
def greeting(a="a", b="b", c="c", d="d"):
    print(a, b, c, d, end="\n")


greeting("a1", "b1")
```

When a final formal parameter of the form **name is present, it receives a dictionary containing all keyword arguments except for those corresponding to a formal parameter. This may be combined with a formal parameter of the form \*name (described in the next subsection) which receives a tuple containing the positional arguments beyond (\*name must occur before \*\*name).

```py
def greeting(name: str, *args, **kwargs):
    print(name)
    for arg in args:
        print("arg", arg)
    for kw in kwargs:
        print(kw, ":", kwargs[kw])


greeting("admin", "a", "b", "c", age=23, address="Ha Noi")
```

## Special parameters

By default, arguments may be passed to a Python function either by position or explicitly by keyword. For readability and performance, it makes sense to restrict the way arguments can be passed so that a developer need only look at the function definition to determine it items if items are passed by position, by position or kw, or by kw.

A function definition may look like:

```py
def f(pos1, pos2, /, pos_or_kwd, *, kwd1, kwd2)
# positional only
# positional or kw
# keyword only
```

Where / and * are optional. If used, these symbols indicate the kind of parameter by how the arguments may be passed to function: position-only, positional-or-keyword, and keyword-only.

**Positional-or-Keyword Arguments**

If / and * are not present in the function definition, arguments may be passed to a function by position or by keyword.

**Positional-Only Parameters**

Looking at this in a bit more detail, it is possible to mark certain parameters as positional-only. If positional-only, the parameters' order matters, and the parameters cannot passed by keyword

Looking at this in a bit more detail, it is possible to mark certain parameters as positional-only. If positional-only, the parameters' order matters, and the parameters cannot passed by keyword.

**Keyword-Only Arguments**

```py
def standard_arg(arg):
    print(arg)

def pos_only_arg(arg, /):
    print(arg)

def kwd_only_arg(*, arg):
    print(arg)

def combined_example(pos_only, /, standard, *, kwd_only):
    print(pos_only, standard, kwd_only)
```

## Arbitrary Argument Lists

Finally, the least frequently used option is to specify that a function can be called with an arbitrary number of arguments. These arguments will be wrapped up in a tuple.

## Unpacking Argument Lists

The reverse situation occurs when the arguments are already in a list or tuple but need to be unpacked for a function call requiring separate positional arguments. For instance, the built-in range() function expects separate start and stop arguments, it they are not available separately, write the function call with * -operator to unpack the arguments out of a list or tuple:

```py
list(range(3, 6))
[3, 4, 5]

args = [3, 6]
list(range(*args))
[3, 4, 5]
```

```py
def greeting(name: str, age: int):
    print(name, age)


args = {"name": "ngoctd", "age": 23}

greeting(**args)
```

## Lambda Expressions

Small anonymous functions can be created with the lambda keyword. Lambda functions can be used whenever function objects are required.

```py
def make_incrementor(n):
    return lambda x: x + n


f = make_incrementor(18)

print(f(1))
print(f(2))
```

## Documentation Strings

## Function Annotations

Function annotations are completely optional md information about the types used by user-defined functions.

Annotations are stored in the __annotations__ attribute of the function as a dictionary and have no effect on any other part of the function. Parameter annotations are defined by a colon after the parameter name followed by an expression evaluating to the value of the annotation.

```py
def greeting(name: str, age: int) -> None:
    print(f"Annotations: {greeting.__annotations__}")


greeting("ngoctd", 23)
```
