# 5. Data structures

## 5.1. More on Lists

```py
a = []

a.append(1)
print(a)
a[len(a) :] = [2]
print(a)

a.extend(range(3, 5))
print(a)
a[len(a) :] = [5, 6]
print(a)
```

list.pop([i])

Remove the item at the given position in the list, and return it. If no index is specified a.pop() removes and returns  the last item in the list.

list.clear()

Remove all items from the list. Equivalent to del a[:]

list.index(x[, start[, end]])

Return zero-based index in the list of the first item whose value is equal to x. Raise a ValueError if there is no such item.

**Using Lists as Stacks**

```py
stack = [3, 4, 5]
stack.append(6)
stack.append(7)
print(stack)
stack.pop()
print(stack)
```

**Using Lists as Queue**

It is also possible to use a list as a queue, where the first element added is the first element retrieved ("first-in", "first-out"); however, lists are not efficient for this purpose. While appends and pops from the end of list are fast, doing inserts or pops from the beginning of a list is slow (because all of the other elements have to be shifted by one).

```py
from collections import deque

queue = deque(["Eric", "John", "Michael"])
queue.append("Terry")
queue.append("Graham")
queue.popleft()
print(queue)
queue.popleft()
print(queue)
```

**List Comprehensions**

```py
squares = []

for x in range(10):
    squares.append(x**2)

print(squares)

squares = [x**2 for x in range(1, 10)]
print(squares)

squares = list(map(lambda x: x**2, range(10)))
print(squares)
```

**Nested List Comprehensions**

The initial expression in a list comprehensions can be any arbitrary expression, including another list comprehensions.

```py
matrix = [
    [1, 2, 3, 4],
    [5, 6, 7, 8],
    [9, 10, 11, 12],
]

rs = [[row[i] for row in matrix] for i in range(4)]
print(rs)
```

## The del statement

There is a way to remove an item from a list given its index instead of its value: the del statement. This differs from the pop() method which returns a value. The del statement can also be used to remove slices from a list or clear the entire list (which we did earlier by assignment of an empty list to the slice).

```py
a = [-1, 1, 66, 33, 11]
del a[0]
print(a)

del a[2:4]
print(a)
```

## Tuples and Sequences

```py
t = 12345, 54321, "hello!"
print(t[0])
print(t)

u = t, (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
print(u)
```

Tuples are immutable:

t[0] = 888888

TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment

As you see, on output tuples are always enclosed in parentheses, so that nested tuples are interpreted correctly; they may be input with or without surrounding parentheses, although often parentheses are necessary anyway. It is not possible to assign to the individual items of tuple, however it is possible to create tuples which contain mutable objects, such as lists.

Though tuples may seem similar to lists, they are often used in different situations and for different purposes. Tuples are immutable, and usually contain a heterogeneous of elements that are accessed via unpacking (see later in this section) or indexing. Lists are mutable, and their element usually homogeneous and are accessed by iterating over the list.

## 5.4. Sets

Curly braces or the set() function can be used to create sets. Note: to create an empty set you have to use set(), not {}; the latter creates an empty dict, a data structure that we dicuss in the next section.

```py
a = set("abc")
print(a)
b = set("ayz")
print(b)
print(a - b)
print(a | b)
print(a & b)
print(a ^ b)
```

## 5.5. Dictionaries

Another useful data type built into Python is the dictionary. Dictionaries are sometimes found in other languages as associate memories or associative arrays. Unlike unsequences, which are indexed by a range of numbers, dictionaries are indexed by keys, which can be any immutable type; strings and number can always be keys. Tuples can be used as keys if they contain only strings, number or tuples; if a tuple contains any mutable object either directly or indirectly, it cannot be used as a key. You can't use lists as keys, since lists can be modified in place using index assignmentss...

The main operations on a dict are storing a value with some key and extracting the value given in the key. It is also possible to delete a key: value pair with del. If you store using a key that is already in use, the old value associated with that key is forgotten. It is an error to extract a value using a non-existent key.

Performing list(d) on an dict returns a list of all the keys used in the dict, in insertion order (if you want to sorted, just use sorted(d) instead). To check whether a single key is in the dict use the in keyword.

```py
tel = {"jack": 4098, "sape": 4139}
tel["guido"] = 4127
print(tel)

print(tel["jack"])
del tel["sape"]
print(tel)
tel["irv"] = 4127
print(tel)

print(list(tel))
print(sorted(tel))

print("guido" in tel)
print("jack" in tel)
print(tel.get("abc"))

print(dict([("sape", 1234), ("guido", 4567), ("jack", 789)]))
```

In addition, dict comprehensions can be used to create dictionaries from arbitrary key and value expressions:

```py
squares = {x: x**2 for x in (2, 4, 6)}
print(squares)
```

When the keys are simple string, it is sometimes easier to specify pairs using keyword arguments:

```py
rs = dict(sape=4139, guido=4127, jack=4098)
print(rs)

squares = dict(a=4, b=9, c=16)
print(squares)
```

## Looping Techniques

When looping through dictionaries, the key and corresponding value can be retrieved at the same time using the items() method.

```py
knights = {"gallahad": "the pure", "robin": "the brave"}
for k, v in knights.items():
    print(k, ":", v)
```

When looping through a sequence, the position index and corresponding value can be retrieved at the same time using the enumerate() function.

```py
for i, v in enumerate(["tic", "tac", "toe"]):
    print(i, v)
```

## More on Conditions

The conditions used in while and if statements can contain any operators, not just comparisons.

## Comparing Sequences and Other Types

Sequence objects typically may be compared to other objects with the same sequence type. The comparison uses lexicographical ordering: first the first two items are compared, and if they differ this determines the outcome of the comparison; if they are equal, the next two items are compared, and so on, until either sequence is exhausted. If two items to be compared are themselves sequences of the same type.
