# Value Parts - to gain a deeper understanding into Go values

## Two categories of Go types

Go can be viewed as a C-family language, which can be confirmed from the two previous articles pointers in Go and structs in Go. The memory structs of struct types and pointer types in Go and C are much alike.

Each c value in memory occupies one memory block (one continuous memory segment). However, a value of some kinds of Go types may often be hosted on more than one memory block.

Later, we call the parts (being distributed on different memory blocks) of a value as value parts. A value hosting on more than one memory blocks is composed of one direct value part and several underlying indirect parts which are referenced by that direct value part.

|Types whose values each is only hosted on one single memory block|Types whose values each may be hosted on multiple memory blocks|
|-|-|
|Solo direct value part|Direct part -> underlying part|
|boolean types|slice types|
|numeric types|map types|
|pointer types|channel types|
|unsafe pointer types|function types|
|struct types|interface types|
|array types|string types|

The types in the second category are not very fundamental types for a language, we can implement them from scratch by using the types from the first category. However, by encapsulating some common or unique functionalities and supporting these types as the first-class citizens in Go, the experiences of Go programming become enjoyable and productive.

## Two kinds of pointer types in Go

A pointer value stores a memory address of another value, unless the pointer value is a nil pointer. We can say the pointer value references the other value, or the other values is referenced by the pointer values. Values can also be referenced indirectly

- If a struct value **a** has a pointer field **b** which references a value c, then we can say the struct **a** also references value **c**.
- If a value **x** references (either directly or indirectly) a value **y**, and the value **y** references (either directly or indirectly) a value **z**, then we can also say the value **x** (indirectly) references value **z**. 

We call a struct type with fields of pointer types as a pointer wrapper type, and call a type whose values may contains (either directly or indirectly) pointers a pointer holder type.

## Internal definitions of the types in the second category

The internal definitions of map, channel and function types are similar

```go
// map types
type _map *hashtableImpl

// channel types
type _channel *channelImpl

// function types
type _function *functionImpl
```
So, internally, types of the three kinds are just pointer types. In other words, the direct parts of values of these types are pointers internally. For each non-zero value of these types, its direct part (a pointer) references its indirect underlying implementation part.

## Internal definition of slice types

```go
type _slice struct {
    // referencing underlying elements
    elements unsafe.Pointer
    // number of elements and capacity
    len, cap int
}
```
Slice types are pointer wrapper struct types. Each non-zero slice value has an indirect underlying part which stores the element values of the slice value. The elements field of the direct part references the indirect underlying part of the slice value.

## Internal definition of string types

```go
type _string struct {
    elements *byte // referencing underlying bytes
    len int // number of bytes
}
```
So string types are also pointer wrapper struct types internally. Each string value has an indirect underlying part storing the bytes of the string value, the indirect part is referenced by the elements field of that string value.

## Internal definition of interface types

```go
type _interface struct {
    dynamicType *_type // the dynamic type
    dynamicValue unsafe.Pointer // the dynamic value
}
```
Interface types are also pointer wrapper struct types. The internal definition of an interface type has two pointer fields. Each non-zero interface value has two indirect underlying parts which store the dynamic type and dynamic value of that interface value.

```go
type _interface struct {
    dynamicTypeInfo *struct {
        dynamicType *_type // the dynamic type
        methods []*_function // method table
    }
    dynamicValue unsafe.Pointer // the dynamic value
}
```
## Underlying value parts are not copied in value assignments

We have learned that the internal definitions of the types in the second category are pointer holder (pointer or pointer wrapper) types.

In Go, each value assignment (including parameter passing, etc) is a shallow value copy if the involved destination and source values have the same type (if their types are different, we can think that the source value will be implicity converted to the destination type before doing that assignment). In other words, only the direct part of the source value is copied to the destination value in a value assignment. If the source value has underlying value parts, then the direct parts of the destination and source values will reference the same underylyng value part(s).

## About the "Reference Type" and "Reference Value" terminologies

The word reference in Go world is a big mess. It brings many confusions to Go community. Use reference as quanlifiers of types and values, or treat reference as the opposite of value. This is strongly discouranged in Go 101. Here just list some absolutely misuses of reference:

- Only slice, map, channel and function types are reference types in go (we shouldn't exclude any pointer holder types from reference types)
- References are opposites of values (view reference values as special values, instead of opposites of values)
- Some parameters are passed by reference (all parameters are passed by copy, of direct parts, in Go)

Prefer to define them as pointer holders.

