# Arrays, Slices and Maps in Go

## Simple overview of container types and values

Each container type has key, len.

There are also many differences between the three kinds of container types. Most of the differences originate from the differences between the value memory layouts of the three kinds of types. An array value consists of only one direct part, however a slice or map value may have an underlying part, which is referenced by the direct part of the slice or map value.

Elements of an array or a slice are both stored contiguously in a continuous memory segment. For an array, the continuous memory segment hosts the direct part of the array. For a slice, the continuous memory segment hosts the underlying indirect part of the slice. The map implementation of the standard Go compiler/runtime adopts the hashtable algorithm. So all elements of the map are also stored in an underlying continuous memory segment, but they may be not contiguous. There may be many holds (gaps) within the continuous memory segment.

We can access an element through its key. The time complexities of element accesses on all container values are all O(1), though, generally map element accesses are several times slower than array and slice element accesses. But maps have two advantages over arrays and slices
- the key types of maps can be any comparable types
- maps consume much less memory than arrays and slices if most elements are zero values.

## Literal Representations of Zero Values of Container Types

Like pointer types, zero values of all slice and map types are represented with the predeclared nil.

When an array variable is declared without being specified an initial value, memory has been allocated for the elements of the zero array value. The memory for the elements of a nil slice or map value has not been allocated yet.

Please not, []T{} represents a blank slice value (with zero elements) of slice type []T, it is different from []T(nil). The same situation is for map[K]T{} and map[K]T(nil).

## Compare Container Values

A slice or map value can't be compared with another slice or map value (or itself), it can be compared to the bare untyped nil identifier to check whether or not the slice or map value is a zero value.

Most array types are comparable, except the ones whose element types are incomparable types.

## Recall the internal structure definition of Slice Types

```go
type _slice struct {
    elements unsafe.Pointer // referencing underlying elements
    len int
    cap int
}
```
When the slice is used as the base slice in an append function call,

- If the number of appended elements is larger than the number of the redundant element slots of the base slice, a new underlying memory segment will be allocated for the result slice, thus the result slice and the base slice will not share any elements.
- Otherwise, no new underlying memory segments will be allocated for the result slice, and the elements of the base slice also belong to the elements of the result slice. In other words, the two slices share some elements and all of their elements are hosted on the same underlying memory segment.

## Container Assignments

If a map is assigned to another map, then the two maps will share all (underlying) elements. Appending elements into (or deleting elements from) one map will reflect on the other map.

Like map assignments, if a slice assigned to another slice, they will share all (underlying) elements. Their respective lengths and capacities equal to each other. However, if the length/capacity of one slice changes later, the change will not reflect on the other slice.

When an array is assgined to another array, all the elements are copied from the source one to the destination one.

## Append and Delete Container Elements

## Addressability of Container Elements

Following are some facts about the addressabilities of container elements

- Elements of addressable array values are also addressable. Elements of unaddressable array values are also unaddressable. The reason is each array value only consists of one direct part.
- Elements of any slice are always addressable, whether or not that slice value is addressable. This is because the elements of a slice are stored in the underlying (indirect) value part of the slice and the undelying part is always hosted on an allocated memory segment.
- Elements of map values are always unaddressable.

```go
a := [5]int{2, 3, 5, 7} // a is addressable array
// element of a is also addressable
fmt.Println(&a[0])
// element of an array unaddressable are also unaddressable
fmt.Pritnln(&[1]int{0}[0]) // error
```

Unlike most other unaddressable values, which direct parts can not be modified, the direct part of a map element values can be modified, but can only be modified (overwritten) as a whole. For most kinds of element types, this is not a big issue. However, if the element type of map type is an array type or struct type, things become some counter-intuitive.

We learned that each of struct and array values only consists of one direct part. So

- If the element type of a map is a struct type, we can not individually modify each field of an element (which is a struct) of the map.
- If the element of a map is an array type, we cannot individually modify each element of an element (which is an array) of the map.

```go
func main() {
    type T struct {age int}
    mt := map[string]T{}
    mt["John"] = T{age: 29} // modify it as a whole
    ma := map[int][5]int{}
    ma[1] = [5]int{1: 789} // modify it as a whole

    // The following two lines fail to compile
    // for map elements can be modified partially
    /*
    ma[1][1] = 123 // error unaddressable
    mt["John"].age = 30 // error unaddressable
    */

    // Accesses are okay
    fmt.Println(ma[1][1]) // 789
    fmt.Println(mt["John"].age) // 29
}
```
To make any expected modification work in the above example, the corresponding map element should be saved in a temporary variable firstly, then the tmp variable is modified as needed, in the end the corresponding map element is overwritten by the tmp variable

```go
func main() {
    type T struct {age int}
    mt := map[string]T{}
    mt["John"] = T{age: 29}
    ma := map[int][5]int{}
    ma[1] = [5]int{1: 789}

    t := mt["John"] // a tmp copy
    t.age = 30
    mt["John"] = t // overwrite it back

    a := ma[1] // a tmp copy
    a[1] = 123
    ma[1] = a // overwrite it back
}
```

## Derive Slices From Arrays and Slices

We can drive a new slice from another (base) slice or a base addressable array by using the subslice syntax forms. The elements of the derived slide and the base array or slice are hosted on the same memory segment. In other words, the derived slide and the base array or slide may share some contiguous elements. 


## Copy Slice elements with the built-in copy function

We can use built-in copy function to copy elements from one slice to another, the types of the two slides are not required to be identical, but the element types must be identical. In other words, the two argument slices must share the same underlying type.

## Clone slices

```go
// solution 1
sClone := append([]T(nil), s...)

// solution 2
sClone := make([]T, len(s))
copy(sClone, s)
```

## Container Related Operations Are Not Synchronized Internally

Please not that, all container operations are not synchronized internally. Without making using of any data synchronization technique, it is okey for multiple goroutines to read a container concurrently, but it is not okay for multiple goroutines to manipulate a container concurrently and at least one goroutine modifies the container. The latter case will cause data races, even make goroutine panic. We must synchronized the container operations manually.