# Strings in Go

This article will list all the facts of strings

## The Internal Structure of String Types

```go
type _string struct {
    elements *byte // underlying bytes
    len int // number of bytes
}
```
A string is actually a byte sequence wrapper. We can really view a string as an (element-immutable) byte slice.

## More fact about string types and values in Go

- Like Java, the contents (underlying bytes) of string values are immutable. The lengths of string values also can't be modified separately. An addressable string value can only be overwritten as a whole by assigning another string value to it.

- Use the element access syntax aString[i] introduced in container element accesses to get the ith byte value stored in aString. The expression aString[i] is not addressable. Value aString[i] can't be modified.

- For standard Go compiler, the destination string variable and source string value in a string assignment will share the same underlying byte sequence in memory. The result of a substring expression aString[start:end] also shares the same underlying byte sequence with the base string aString in memory.

```go
func main() {
    var helloWorld = "hello world!"
    var hello = helloWorld[:5] // substring
    // 104 is the ASCII code (and Unicode) of char 'h'
    fmt.Println(hello[0])

    // hello[0] is unaddressable and immutable,
    // so the following two lines fail to compile
    // hello[0] = 'H'         // error
    // fmt.Println(&hello[0]) // error
}
```
## String Encoding and Unicode Code Points

Basic unit in Unicode is not character, it is code point instead. For most code points, each of them corresponds to a character, but for a few characters, each of them consists of several code points.

Code points are represented as rune values in Go. In Go, rune is a bulit-in alias of type int32.

For UTF-8 encoding, each code point value may be stored as one or more bytes (up to four bytes). For example, each English code point (which corresponds to one English character) is stored as one byte, however each Chinese code point (which corresponds to one Chinese character) is stored as three bytes.

In a conversion from a rune slice to string, each slice element (a rune value) will be UTF-8 encoded as from one to four bytes and stored in the result string. Bad UTF-8 encoding representations will be converted to a rune value 0xFFFD

```go
func main() {
	var a = "你好"
	fmt.Println(len(a), len([]byte(a)), len([]rune(a)))
}
```

When a string is converted to a byte slide, the result byte slice is just a deep copy of the underlying byte sequence of the string. A memory allocation is needed to store the deep copy in each of such conversions. (Deep copy because: slice is mutable, but the bytes stored in strings are immutable, so a byte slice and a string cant share byte elements)

## Compiler Optimizations for Conversions Between Strings and Byte Slices

## for-range on Strings

The for-range loop control flow applies to strings. for-range will iterate the Unicode point as rune values, instead of bytes in a string. Bad UTF-8 encoding representations in the string will be interpreted as run value OxFFFD.

```go
func main() {
    s := "éक्षिaπ囧"
	for i, rn := range s {
		fmt.Printf("%2v: 0x%x %v \n", i, rn, string(rn))
	}
	fmt.Println(len(s))
}
/*
 0: 0x65 e
 1: 0x301 ́
 3: 0x915 क
 6: 0x94d ्
 9: 0x937 ष
12: 0x93f ि
15: 0x61 a
16: 0x3c0 π
18: 0x56e7 囧
21
*/
```

## Sugar: Use Strings as Byte Slices

```go
func main() {
    hello := []byte("Hello")
    world := "world!"

    // The normal way
    helloWorld := append(hello, world...) // sugar way
    fmt.Println(string(helloWorld))

    helloWorld2 := make([]byte, len(hello) + len(world))
    copy(helloWorld2, hello)
    copy(helloWorld2[len(hello):], world)
    fmt.Println(string(helloWorld2))
}
```

## More About String Comparisons