# Case Studies

Sometimes it's not about query optimization, schema optimization, index optimization, or application design optimization - it's about all of these practices put together. The case studies in this section illustrate how to approach some design challenges that frequently cause problems for users. 

## Building a Query Table in MySQL

Building a queue in MySQL is tricky, and most designs we've seen don't work well when the system experiences high traffic and lots of concurrency. The typical pattern is to have a table that contains several types of rows: rows that haven't been processed, rows in process, and finished rows. One or more worker processes look for unprocessed rows, update them to "claim" them, and then perform the work and update them to mark them as finished. Common examples include emails that are ready to send, orders to process, comments to moderate, and so on.

There are two broad reasons why this doesn't work well. First, the table tends to grow very large, and searching for unprocessed rows becomes slow when the table is large and indexes are many levels deep. You can solve this by splitting the queue into two tables and moving the completed rows to the archive or history table, which helps keep the queue table small.

The second reason is that the process of finding work to do is usually implemented with polling and locking. Polling creates load on the server, and locking creates contention and serialization between worker processes.

Polling might actually be okay, but if it's not, you can use notifications to tell workers that there's work to do. One technique is to use the SLEEP() function with a very long timeout and an indicative comment, such as the following:

```sql
SELECT /* waiting on unsent_emails */ SLEEP(10000);
```

The final problem is how workers should claim rows so that they don't get processed multiple times. We often see this implemented with SELECT FOR UPDATE. This is usually a huge scalability bottleneck and causes a lot of pileups as transactions block on each other and wait. 

In general, it's a good idea to avoid SELECT FOR UPDATE. And not just for a queue table - it's a good idea to avoid it for any purpose. There is almost always a better way to achieve your desired purpose. In the case of a queue, you can use a simple UPDATE to claim rows, and then check whether you claimed anything.

```sql
CREATE TABLE unsent_emails (
    id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    -- columns for the message, from, to, subject, etc.
    status ENUM('unsent', 'claimed', 'sent'),
    owner INT UNSIGNED NOT NULL DEFAULT 0,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    KEY (owner, status, ts)
);
```

## Using User-Defined Functions

Our last advanced query optimization illustrates when SQL just isn't the right tool for the job. When you need 

## Summary

Query optimization is the final piece in the interlocking puzzle of schema, index, and query design to create high-performance applications. To write good queries, you need to understand schemas and indexing, and vice versa.

Ultimately, it is still about response time, and understanding how queries execute so that you can reason about where the time is consumed. With the addition of a few things such as the parsing and optimization process, this is just the next step in understanding how MySQL accesses tables and indexes, which we discussed in the previous chapter.

Optimization always requires a three-pronged approach: stop doing things, do them fewer times, and do them more quickly. We hope that the case studies we presented help to tie all together and illustrate this approach in action.

Beyond the fundamental building blocks of queries, tables, and indexes are more advanced features in MySQL, such as partitioning, which has a similar goal to indexes but works differently. MySQL also supports features such as a query cache, which avoids the need to  even execute queries (remember, "stop doing things").

