# Concurrency Control

## Read/Write Locks

Systems that deal with concurrent read/write access typically implement a locking system that consist of two lock types. These locks are usually known as shared locks and exclusive locks, or read locks and write locks. 

In the database world, locking happens all the time: MySQL has to prevent one client from reading a piece of data while another is changing it.

## Lock Granularity

One way to improve the concurrency of a shared resource is to be more selective about what you lock. Rather than locking the entire resource, lock only the part that contains the data you need to change. Better yet, lock only the exact piece of data you plan to change. Minimizing the amount of data that you lock at any one time lets changes to a given resource occur simultaneously, as long as they don't conflict with each other.

The problem is locks consume resources. Every lock operation - getting a lock, checking to see whether a lock is free, releasing a lock and so on. If the system spends too much time managing locks instead of storing and retrieving data, performance can suffer. 

A locking strategy is a compromise between lock overhead and data safety, and that compromise affects performance. Most commercial database servers don't give you much choice: you get what is known as row-level locking in your tables, with a variety of often complex ways to give good performance with many locks.

### Table locks

The most basic locking strategy available in MySQL, and the other with the lowest overhead is table locks. A table lock is analogous to the mailbox locks described earlier: it locks the entire table. When a client wishes to write to a table (insert, delete, update, etc), it acquires a write lock. This keeps all other read and write operations at bay. When nobody is writing, readers can obtain read locks, which don't conflict with other read locks.

Although storage engines can manage their own locks, MySQL itself also uses a variety of locks that are effectively table-level for various purposes. For instance, the server uses a table-level lock for statements such as ALTER TABLE, regardless of the storage engine.

### Row locks

The locking style that offers the greatest concurrency (and carries the greatest overload) is the use of row locks. Row-level locking, as this strategy is commonly known, is available in the InnoDB and XtraDB storage engines, among others. Row locks are implemented in the storage engine, not the server (refer back to the logical architecture diagram if you need to). The server is completely unaware of locks implemented in the storage engines, and as you'll see later in this chapter and throughout the book, the storage engines are all implement locking in their own ways.
