# MySQL's Storage Engines

MySQL stores each database as a subdirectory of its data directory in the underlying filesystem. When you create a table, MySQL stores the table definition in a .frm file. Because MySQL uses the filesystem to store database names and table definitions, case sensitive depends on the platform. On a Windows MySQL instance, table and database names are  case sensitive; on Unix-like systems, they are case sensitive.

## The InnoDB Engine

InnoDB is the default transactional storage engine for MySQL and the most important and broadly useful engine overall.

## The MyISAM Engine

### Compressed MyISAM tables

Some tables never change once they're created and filled with data. These might be well suited to compressed MyISAM tables.

You can compress (or pack) tables with the myisampack utility. You can't modify compressed tables (although you can uncompress, modify, and recompress tables if you need to). Compressed MyISAM tables can have indexes, but they're read-only.

### MyISAM performance

Because of its compact data storage and low overhead due to its simpler design, MyISAM can provide good performance for some uses. It does have some severe scalability limitations, including mutexes on key caches.

## The Memory engine

Memory tables (formerly called HEAP tables) are useful when you need fast access to data that either never changes or doesn't need to persist after a restart. Memory tables can be up to an order of magnitude faster than MyISAM tables. All of their data is stored in memory, so queries don't have to wait for disk I/O. The table structure of a Memory table persists across a server restart, but no data survives. 

Here are some good uses for Memory tables:

- For "lookup" or "mapping" tables, such as a table that maps postal codes to state names.
- For caching the results of periodically aggregated data
- For intermediate results when analyzing data

Memory tables support HASH indexes, which are very fast for lookup queries. Although Memory tables are very fast, they often don't work well as a general-purpose replacement for disk-based tables. They use table-level locking which gives low write concurrency. They do not support TEXT and BLOB column types, and they support only fixed-size rows, so they really store VARCHARs as CHARs, which can waste memory.

MySQL uses the Memory engine internally while processing queries that require a temporary table to hold intermediate results. If the intermediate result becomes too large for a Memory table, or has TEXT or BLOB columns. MySQL will convert it to a MyISAM table on disk.

**Note**
People often confuse Memory tables with temporary tables, which are ephemeral tables created with CREATE TEMPORARY TABLE. Temporary tables can use any storage engine; they are not the same thing as tables that use the Memory storage engine. Temporary tables are visible only to a single connection and disappear entirely when the connection closes.

## Selecting the Right Engine

**Transactions**
If you application requires transactions, InnoDB (or XtraDB) is the most stable. MyISAM is good choice if a task doesn't require transactions and issues primary either SELECT or INSERT queries. Sometimes specific components of an application (such as logging) fall into this category.

**Backups**

**Crash recovery**
If you have a lot of data, you should seriously consider how long it will take to recover from a crash. MyISAM tables become more easily and take much longer to recover than InnoDB tables. In fact, this is one of the most important reasons why a lot of people use InnoDB when they don't need transactions.

**Special features**

## Table Conversions

There are several ways to convert a table from one storage engine to another, each which advantages and disadvantages.

**ALTER TABLE**
The easiest way to move a table from one engine to another is with an ALTER TABLE statement.

```sql
ALTER TABLE tbl ENGINE = InnoDB; 
```

This syntax works for all storage engines, but there's a catch: it can take a lot of time. MySQL will perform a row-by-row copy of your old table into a new table. During that time, you'll probably be using all of the server's disk I/O capacity, and the original table will be read-locked while the conversion runs.

When you convert from one storage engine to another, any storage engine-specific features are lost. For example, if you convert an InnoDB table to MyISAM and back again, you will lose any foreign keys originally defined on the InnoDB table.

**Dump and import**

**CREATE and SELECT**

The third conversion technique is a compromise between the first mechanism's speed and safety of the second. Rather than dumping the entire table or convertin it all at once, create the new table and use MySQL's INSERT ...SELECT syntax to populate it, as follows:

```sql
CREATE TABLE innodb_table LIKE myisam_table;
ALTER TABLE innodb_table ENGINE=InnoDB;
INSERT INTO innodb_table SELECT * FROM myisam_table;
```
