# Variables

## Basics

The variable name is case-sensitive.

```php
<?php

$var = 'Bob';
$Var = 'Joe';

echo "$var, $Var";
```

By default, variables are always assigned by value. That is to say, when you assign an expression to a variable, the entire value of the original expression is copied into the destination variable. This means, for instance, that after assigning one variable's value to another, changing one of those variables will be no effect on the other. For more information on this kind of assignment.

PHP also offers another way to assign values to variables: assign by reference. This means that new variable simple references (in other words, "becomes an alias for" or "points to") the original variable.

```php
<?php

$foo = 'Bob';
$bar = &$foo;
$bar = "My name is $bar\n";

echo $bar;
echo $foo;
```

```php
<?php
$foo = 25;
$bar = &$foo; // This is a valid assignment.
$bar = &(24*7); // Invalid; references an unnamed expression.

function test() 
{
    return 25;
}

$bar = &test(); // Invalid
```

It is not necessary to intialize variables in PHP however it is very good practice. Uninitialized variables have a default value of their type depending on the context in which they are used - booleans default to **false**, integers and floats default to zero, strings (e.g. used in echo) are set as an empty string and arrays become to an empty array.

```php
<?php

var_dump($unset_var);

echo $unset_bool ? "true\n" : "false\n";

$unset_str .= 'abc';
var_dump($unset_str);

$unset_int += 25;
var_dump($unset_int);

$unset_float += 1.25;
var_dump($unset_float);

$unset_arr[3] = "def"; // array() + array(3 => "def") => array(3 => "def")
var_dump($unset_arr);

$unset_obj->foo = 'bar';
var_dump($unset_obj);
```

Relying on the default value of an uninitialized variable is problematic in the case of including one file into another which uses the same variable name. isset() language construct can be used to detect if a variable has been already initialized.

## Predefined Variables

PHP provides a large number of predefined variables to any script which it runs.

PHP also provides an additional set of predefined arrays containing variables from the web server (if applicable), the environment, and user input.

## Variable scope

```php
<?php
$a = 1;
include 'b.inc';
```

**Using global**

```php
<?php

$a = 1;

function test()
{
    global $a;
    echo $a;
}

test();
```

**$GLOBALS** instead of global

```php
<?php

$a = 1;

function test()
{
    echo $GLOBALS['a'] . "\n";
}

test();
```

**Example demonstrating superglobals and scope**

**Example demonstrating need for static variables**

```php
<?php

function test()
{
    $a = 0;
    echo $a;
    $a++;
}

test();
test();
test();
```

This function is quite useless since every time it is called it sets $a to 0 and prints 0. The $a++ which increments the variable servers no purpose since as soon as the function exits the $a variable disappears. To make a useful counting function which will not lose track of the current count, the $a variable is declared static.

**Example use of static variables**

```php
<?php
function test() 
{
    static $a = 0;
    echo $a;
    $a++;
}
```

Now, `$a` is initialized only in first call of function and every time the test() function is called it will print the value of `$a` and increment it.

Static variables also provide one way to deal with recursive functions. A recursive function is one which calls itself. Care must be taken when writing a recursive function because it is possible to make it recursive indefinitely. You must make sure you have an adequate way of terminating the recursion. The following simple function recursively counts to 10, using the static variable $count to know when to stop:

```php
<?php

function foo()
{
    static $int = 0;
    static $int = 1 + 2;
    // static $int = sqrt(121);

    $int++;
    echo $int;
}

foo();
```

**Usage of static Variables in Inherited Methods**

```php
<?php

class Foo
{
    public static function counter()
    {
        static $counter = 0;
        $counter++;
        return $counter;
    }
}

class Bar extends Foo
{
}

var_dump(Foo::counter());
var_dump(Foo::counter());
var_dump(Bar::counter());
var_dump(Bar::counter());
```

**References with global and static variables**

PHP implements the static and global modifier for variables in terms of references.

## Variable variables

Sometimes it is convenient to be able to have variable variable names. That is, a variable name which can set and used dynamically.

```php
<?php
$a = 'hello';
```

## Variables From External Sources


