# Memory Leaking Scenarios

## Kind-of memory leaking caused by substrings 

Go specification doesn't specify whether or not the result string and base string involved in a substring expression should share the same underlying memory block to host the underlying byte sequences of the two strings. The standard Go compiler/runtime does let them share the underlying memory block. This is a good design, which is both memory and CPU consuming wise. But it may cause kind of memory leaking sometimes.

```go
var s0 []byte // a package-level variable

// A demo purpose function
func f(s1 []byte) {
    s0 = s1[:50]
    // Now, s0 shares the same underlying memory block with s1. Although s1 is not
    // still alive now, but s0 is still alive, so the memory block they share coundn't
    // be collected, though there are only 50 bytes used in the block and all other
    // byte in the block become unavailable 
}

func demo() {
    s := make([]byte, 1 << 20)
    f(s)
}
```

To avoid this kind-of memory leaking, we can convert the substring to a []byte value then convert the []byte value back to string.

```go
func f(s1 string) {
    // dup convert
    s0 = string([]byte(s1[:50]))
}
```

```go
func f(s1 string) {
    s0 = (" " + s1[:50])[1:]
}
```

```go
s1 := make([]byte, 1<<20)
var b bytes.Buffer
b.Write(s1[:50])
```

## Kind-of memory leaking caused by subslices

Similarly to substrings, subslices may also cause kind-of memory leaking.

```go
var s0 []int

func g(s1 []int) {
    s0 = s1[len(s1) - 30:]
}
```
```go
s1 := make([]int, 500)
s0 := make([]int, 30)
copy(s0, s1[len(s1)-30:])
```

## Kind-of memory leaking caused by not resetting pointers in lost slice elements

In the following code, after the h function is called, the memory block allocated for the first and the last elements of slice s will get lost.

```go
func h() []*int {
    s := []*int{new(int), new(int), new(int), new(int), new(int)}

    return s[1:3:3]
}
```

As long as the returned slice is still alive, it will prevent any elements of s from being collected which in consequence prevents the two memory blocks allocated for the two int values referenced by the first and the last elements of s from being collected.

If we want to avoid such kind-of memory leaking, we must reset the pointers stored in the lost elements

```go
func h() []*int {
    s := []*int{new(int), new(int), new(int), new(int), new(int)}

    // Reset pointer values
    s[0], s[len(s) - 1] = nil, nil
    returns [1:3:3]
}
```

## Real memory leaking caused by hanging Goroutines

Goroutine stay in blocking state for ever. Such goroutine are called hanging goroutines. Go runtime will not kill hanging goroutines, so the resources allocated for (and the memory blocks referenced by) the hanging goroutines will never get garbage collected.

We should avoid hanging goroutines which are caused by some logic mistakes in code design.

## Real memory leaking caused by not stopping time.Ticker values which are not used any more

When a time.Timer value is not used any more, it will be garbage collected after some time. But this is not true for a time.Ticker value. We should stop a time.Tickerr value when it is not used any more.

```go
t := time.NewTicker(time.Second)
defer t.Stop()

select {
    case <-t.C:
        log.Println("RUN")
}
```

## Real memory leaking caused by using Finalizers improperly