# Function

In fact, function is one kind of first-class citizen types in Go. In other words, we can use functions as values.

## Function Signatures and Function Types

## Variadic parameters and variadic function types

```go
func (values ...int64) (sum int64)
func (sep string, tokens ...string) string
```

## Function types are incomparable types

Function are incomparable, but like map and slice values, function values can compare with the untyped bare nil identifier.

## More About Function Declarations and Calls Functions whose names can be duplicate 

**1. Functions whose names can be duplicate**

1. One exception is each code package can declare several functions with the same name init and the same type func().

2. Multiple functions can be declared with names as the blank identifier _, the declared functions can never be called

3. All function arguments are passed by copy

When a value is copied, only its direct part is copied

4. The results of calls to custom function can be discarded, not true for calls to some built-in functions.

The results of a custom function call can be discarded together. However, the results of calls to built-in functions, except recovery and copy, can't be discarded. Function calls whose results can't be discarded can't be used as deferred function call or goroutine calls.

## Function Values

The zero values of function types are represented with the predeclared nil.

This is fatal error to call a nil function to start a new goroutine. The fatal error is not recoverable and will make the whole program crash. For other situations, calls to nil function values will produce recoverable panics, including deferred function calls.

Non-nil function values are multi-part values. After one function value is assigned to another, the two functions share the same underlying parts. 

