# Understanding uintptr in Go

This is unsigned integer type which is large enough to hold any pointer address. Therefore its size is platform dependent. It is just an integer representation of an address.

## Properties

- A uintptr can be converted to unsafe.Pointer and viceversa.
- Arithmetic can be performed on the uintptr. Do not here arithmetic cannot be performed in a pointer in Og or unsafe.Pointer in Go.
- uintptr even though it holds a pointer address, it just a value and does not reference any object. Therefore
    - Its value will not be updated if the corresponding object moes. Eg when goroutine stack changes. 
    - The corresponding object can be garbage collected. The GC does not consider uintptr as live references and hence they can be garbage collected.

## Purpose

- One purpose of uintptr is to be used along with unsafe.Pointer for unsafe memory access. Arithmetic operations cannot be performed on unsafe.Pointer.
    - unsafe.Pointer is converted to uintptr
    - arithmetic is then performed on uintptr
    - uintptr is converted back to unsafe.Pointer to access the object now pointed by the address

- Another purpose of uintptr is when you want to save the pointer address value for printing it or storing it. Since the address is just stored and does not reference anything, the corresponding object can be garbage collected. 

See below code where we are converting an unsafe.Pointer to uintptr and priting it. Also, note as mentioned before too one the unsafe.Pointer is converted to uintptr, the reference is lost and the reference variable can be garbage collected.

