# Go Value Copy Costs

Value copying happens frequently in Go programming. Values assignements, argument passing and channel value send operations are all value copying involved. This article will talk about the copy costs of values of all kinds of types.

## Value Sizes

The size of value means how many bytes the direct part of the value will occupy in memory. The indirect underlying parts of a value don't contribute to the size of the value.

## Value Copy Costs 

Generally speaking, the cost to copy a value is proportional to the size of the value. However, value sizes are not the only factor determining value copy costs. Different CPU models and compiler  versions may specially optimize value copying for values with specific sizes.

For standard Go compiler, except values of large-size struct and array types, other types in Go are all small-size types.

To avoid large value copy costs in argument passing and channel value send and receive operations, we should try to avoid using large-size struct and array types as function and method parameter types (including method receiver types) and channel element types. We can use pointer types whose base types are large-size types instead of such scenarios.

One the other hand, we should also consider the fact that too many pointers will increase the pressure of garbage collectors at run time. So whether large-size struct and array types or their corresponding pointer types should be used relies on specific circumstances.

We should also try to avoid using the two-iteration-variable forms to iterate array and slice elements if the element types are large-size types, for each element value will copied to the second iteration variable in the iteration process.