# Concurrency Synchronization Techniques Provided in the sync Standard Package

The sync standard package provides several types which can be used to do synchorinizations for some specialized circumstances and guarantee some specialized memory orders. For the specialized circumstances, these techniques are more efficient, and look cleaner, the the channel ways.

To avoid abnormal behaviors, it is best never to copy the values of the types in the sync standard package.

## The sync.WaitGroup Type

Each sync.WaitGroup value maintains a counter internally. The initial value of the counter is zero. The *WaitGroup type has three method: Add(delta int), Done() and Wait() 

When a goroutine calls wg.Wait()

- If the counter maintained by wg is already zero, then the call wg.Wait() can be viewed as a no-op
- Otherwise (the counter is positive), the goroutine will enter blocking state. It will enter running state again (a.k.a the call wg.Wait() returns) when another goroutine modifies the counter to zero, generally by calling wg.Done()

Please not that wg.Add(delta), wg.Done() and wg.Wait() are shorthands for (&wg).Add(delta), (&wg).Done() and (&wg).Wait(), respectively.

## The sync.Once Type

A *sync.Once value has a Do(f func()) method, which takes a solo parameter with type func().

For an addressable Once value o, the method call o.Do(), which is a shorthand of (&o).Do(), can be concurrently executed multiple times, in multiple goroutines. The arguments of these o.Do() calls should (but are not required to) be the same function value.

Among these o.Do method calls, only exact one argument function will be invoked. The invoked argument function is guaranteed to exit before any o.Do method call returns. In other words, the code in the invoked argument function is guaranteed to be executed before any o.Do method call returns.

Generally, a Once value is used to ensure that a piece of code will be executed exactly once in concurrent programming.

```go
log.SetFlags(0)
x := 0
doSomething := func() {
    x++
    log.Println("Hello")
}

var wg sync.WaitGroup
var once sync.Once
for i := 0; i < 5; i++ {
    wg.Add(1)
    go func() {
        defer wg.Done()
        once.Do(doSomething)
        log.Println("world!")
    }()
}

wg.Wait()
log.Println("x = ", x)
```

## The sync.Mutex and sync.RWMutex Types

Both of the *sync.Mutex and *sync.RWMutex types implement the sync.Locker interface. So they both have two methods, Lock and Unlock, to prevent multiple data users from using a piece of data concurrently. Besides the Lock and Unlock methods, the *RWMutex type has two other methods, RLock and RUnlock to avoid some data users (either writers or readers)

A Mutex value is often called a mutual exclusion lock. A zero Mutex value is an unlocked mutex. A Mutex value can only be locked when it is unlocked status. In other words, once an addressable Mutex value m is locked successfully, a new attempt by a goroutine to lock the Mutex value will make the goroutine neter blocking state, until the Mutex value is unlocked.

Please note that m.Lock() and m.Unlock() are shorthands of (&m).Lock() and (&m).Unlock


## The sync.Cond Type

The sync.Cond type provides an efficient way to do notifications among goroutines.

Each sync.Cond value holds a sync.Locker field with the name L. The field value is often a value of type *sync.Mutex or *sync.RWMutex

The *sync.Conde hash three methods: Wait(), Signal() and Broadcast()

Each sync.Conde value also maintain a FIFO (first in first out) waiting goroutine queue. For an addressable sync.Cond value c,
- c.Wait() must be called when c.L is locked, otherwise, a c.Wait() will cause panic. A c.Wait() call will

1. first push the current goroutine into the waiting goroutine queue maintained by c
2. then call c.L.Unlock() to unlock/unhold the lock c.L
3. then make the current caller goroutine enter blocking state.

(The caller goroutine will be unblocked by another goroutine through calling c.Signal() or c.Broadcast() later.)

Once the caller goroutine is unblocked and enters running state again, c.L.Lock() will be called (in the resumed c.Wait() call) to try 

```go
func main() {

}
```