# Constants and Variables

## Untyped Values and Typed Values

In Go, some values are untyped. An untyped value means the type of the value has not been confirmed yet. On the contrary, the type of a typed value is determined.

For most untyped values, each of them has one default type. The predeclared nil is the only untyped value which has no default type.

```go
var a = 1 // ok
var b = nil // syntax error: use of untyped nil in variable declarationcompilerUntypedNilUse
```

## Explicit Conversions of Untyped Constants

Go supports value conversions. We can use the form T(v) to convert a value v to the type denoted by T (or simply speaking, type T). If the conversion T(v) is legal, Go compilers view T(v) as typed value of type T.

For an untyped constant value v, there are two scenarios where T(v) is legal.

1. v (or the literal denoted by v) is representable as a value of a basic type T. The result value is a typed constant of type T.
2. The default type of v is an integer type (int or rune) and T is a string type.  The result of T(v) is a string of type T and contains the UTF-9 representation of the integer as a Unicode code point. Integer values outside the range of valid Unicode code points result strings represented by "\uFFD" 

```go
var a string = string(65) // warn: only allow converting rune or byte integers to string
```

## Introduction of Type Deductions in Go

Go supports type deduction. In many circumstances, programmers don't need to explicitly specify the types of some values in code. Go compilers will deduce the types for these values by context.

Type deduction is also often called type inference.

## Constant Declarations

Unnamed constants and named constants can be only boolean, numeric and string values.

## Autocomplete in constant declarations

In a group-style constant declaration, except the first constant specification, other constant specifications can be incomplete. An incomplete constant specification only contains as identifier list.

```go
const (
    X float32 = 3.14
    Y           // here must be one identifier, = 3.14
    Z           // here must be one identifier, = 3.14

    A, B = "Go", "language"
    C, _ // here must be two identifier, = "Go", "language"
)
```

## Value Addressability

In Go, some values are addressable (there is an address to find them). All variables are addressable and all constants are unaddressable. 