# Go type system overview

## Composite Types

Go supports the following composite types:

- pointer types
- struct types
- function types - functions are first-class types in Go
- container types:
    - array types - fixed length container types
    - slice type - dynamic-length and dynamic-capacity container type
    - map types - map are associative arrays (or dictionaries). The standard Go compiler implements maps as hashtables.
- channel types - channels are used to synchronize data among goroutines (the green threads in Go)
- interface types - interfaces play a key role in reflection and polymorphism

**Note,**

- A new defined type and its respective source type in type definitions are two distinct types
- Two types defined in two type definitions are always two distinct types
- The new defined type and the source type will share the same underlying type, and their values can be converted to each other 
- Types can be defined within function bodies

## Underlying types

In Go, each type has an underlying type.Rules:

- For built-in types, the respective underlying types are themselves
- For the Pointer type defined in the unsafe standard code package, its underlying type is itself
- The underlying type of an unnamed type, which must be a composite type, is itself
- The newly declared type and the source type have the same underlying type

```go
// The underlying types of the following ones are both int
type (
    MyInt int
    Age MyInt
)

// The following new types have different underlying types
type (
    IntSlice []int // underlying type is []int 
    MyIntSlice []MyInt // underlying type is []MyInt
    AgeSlice []Age // underlying type is []Age
)

// The underlying types of []Age, Ages and AgeSlice are all the unnamed type []Age
type Ages AgeSlice
```

How can an underlying type be traced given a user declared type? The rule is, when a built-in basic type or an unnamed type is met.

MyInt -> int
Age -> MyInt -> int
IntSlice -> []int
MyIntSlice -> []MyInt
AgeSlice -> []Age
Age -> AgeSlice -> []Age

## Value parts

At run time, many values are stored somewhere in memory. In Go, each of such values has a direct part. However, some of them have one or more indirect parts. Each value part occupies a continuous memory segment. The indirect underlying parts of a value are referenced by its direct part through safe or unsafe pointers.

## Value sizes

When a size is stored in memory, the number of bytes occupied by the direct part of the value is called the size of the value. As all values of the same type have the same value size, we often simply call this the size of the type.

We can use the sizeof function in the unsafe standard package to get the size of any value.

## Dynamic type and dynamic value of an interface value

Each interface value can box a non-interface value in it. The value boxed in an interface value is called the dynamic value of the interface value.

## Container types

Arrays, slices and maps can be viewed as formal container types

## Type which support or don't support comparisons

Go doesn't support comparisons for values of the following types:
- slice types
- map types
- function types
- any struct type with a field whose type is incomparable and any array type which element type is incomparable