# Type Embedding

## What is the Meaningfulness of Type Embedding?

The main purpose of type embedding is to extend the functionalities of the embedded types into the embedding type, so that we don't need to reimplement the functionalities of the embedded types for the embedding type.

Go chose the type embedding mechanism, and there is a big different between the two:

- If a type T inherits another type, then type T obtains the abilities of the other type. At the same time, each value of type T can also be viewed as a value of the other type.
- If a type T embeds another type, then type other type becomes a part of type T, and type T obtains the abilities of the other type, but none values of type T can be viewed as values of the other type.

## Does the Embedding Type Obtain the Fields and Methods of the Embedded Types?

```go
type Person struct {
	Name string
	Age int
}

func (p Person) PrintName() {
	fmt.Println("name:", p.Name)
}
func (p *Person) SetAge(age int) {
	p.Age = age
}

type Singer struct {
	Person
	works []string
}

func main() {
	t := reflect.TypeOf(Singer{})
	fmt.Println(t, "has", t.NumField(), "fields:")
	for i := 0; i < t.NumField(); i++ {
		fmt.Print(" field#", i, ": ", t.Field(i).Name, "\n")
	}
	fmt.Println(t, "has", t.NumMethod(), "methods:")
	for i := 0; i < t.NumMethod(); i++ {
		fmt.Print(" method#", i, ": ", t.Method(i).Name, "\n")
	}

	pt := reflect.TypeOf(&Singer{})
	fmt.Println(pt, "has", pt.NumMethod(), "methods:")
	for i := 0 ; i < pt.NumMethod(); i ++ {
		fmt.Print(" method#", i, ": ", pt.Method(i).Name, "\n")
	}
}
```

From the result, we know that the type Singer really owns a PrintName method, and the type *Single really owns two methods, PrintName and SetAge. But the type Singer doesn't own a Name field.

## Shorthands of Selectors

If a middle name in a selector corresponds to an embedded field, then that name can be ommited from the selector.


```go
type A struct {
	FieldX int
}

func (a A) MethodA() {}

type B struct {
	*A
}

type C struct {
	B
}

func main() {
	c := &C{B: B{A: &A{FieldX: 100}}}

	// The following 4 lines are equivalent
	_ = c.B.A.FieldX
	_ = c.B.FieldX // FieldX is a promoted field of B
	_ = c.A.FieldX // A is a promoted field of B
	_ = c.FieldX   // FieldX is a promoted field

	// The following 4 lines are equivalent
	c.B.A.MethodA()
	c.B.MethodA()
	c.A.MethodA()
	c.MethodA()

	fmt.Println(c.FieldX)
}
```

## Selector Shadowing and Colliding

```go
type A struct {
	x string
}
func (A) y(int) bool {
	return false
}

type B struct {
	y bool
}

func (B) x (string) {
}

var v1 struct {
	A
	B
}

func f1() {
	_ = v1.x // error: ambiguous select v1.x
	_ = v1.y // error: ambiguous select v1.y
}
```
One detail which is unusual but should be noted is that two unexported methods (or fields) from two different packages are always viewed as two different identifiers, even if their names are identical.

## Implicit Methods for Embedding Types

```go
type Person struct {
	Name string
	Age  int
}

func (p Person) PrintName() {
	fmt.Println("Name:", p.Name)
}

func (p *Person) SetAge(age int) {
	p.Age = age
}

type Singer struct {
	Person
	works []string
}

func main() {
	gaga := Singer{Person: Person{"Gaga", 30}}
	rt := reflect.TypeOf(gaga)
	for i := 0; i < rt.NumMethod(); i++ {
		log.Println(rt.Method(i).Name)
	}
}
```
Both of type Singer and type *Singer have a PrintName method each, and the type *Singer also has a SetAge method. However, we never explicitly declare these methods for the two types. Where do these methods come from? 

In fact, assume a struct type S embeds a type (or a type alias) T and the embedding is legal,

- for each method of the embedded type T, if the selections to that method neither collide with nor are shadowed by other selectors, then compilers will implicitly, the compilers will implicitly declare a corresponding method with the same specification for the embedding struct type S. And consequently, compilers will also implicitly declare a corresponding method for the pointer type *S.

- for each method of the pointer type *T, if the selectors to that method neither collide with nor are shadowed by other selectors, then compilers will implicit declare a corresponding method with the same specification for the pointer type *S.

- type struct{T} and type *struct{T} both obtain all the methods of the type denoted by T.
- type *struct{T}, type struct{*T} and type *struct{*T} all obtain all methods of type *T

The following (promoted) methods are implicitly declared by compilers for type Singer and type *Singer:

```go
func (s Singer) PrintName = s.Person.PrintName
func (s *Singer) PrintName = (*s).Person.PrintName
func (s *Singer) SetAge = (&(*s).Person).SetAge
```

## Normalization and Evaluation of Promoted Method Values

