# Memory Blocks

Go is a language which supports automatic memory management, such as automatic memory allocation and automatic garbage collection. So Go programmers can do programming without handling the underlying verbose memory management. This is not only brings much convenience and saves Go programmers lots of time, but also helps Go programmers avoid many careless bugs.

A memory block is continuous memory segment to host value parts at run time. Different memory blocks may have different sizes, to host different value parts. One memory block may host multiple value parts at the same time, but each value part can only be hosted within one memory block, no matter how large the size of that value part is. In other words, for any value part, it never corsses memory blocks.

There are many reasons when one memory block may host multiple value parts.

- A struct value often have several fields. So when a memory block is allocated for a struct value, the memory block will also host (the direct parts of these field values).
- An array values often have many elements. So when a memory block is allocated for a array value, the memory block will also host(the direct parts of) the array element values 
- The underlying element sequences of two slices may be hosted on the same memory block, the two element sequences even can overlap with each other.

## A value references the memory blocks which host its value parts

We have known that a value part can reference another value part. Here, we extend the reference definition by saying a memory block is referenced by all the value parts it hosts. So if a value part v is referenced by another value part, then the other value will also reference the memory block hosting v, indirectly.

## When will memory blocks be allocated?

In Go, memory blocks may be allocated but not limited at following situations

- Explicitly call the new and make built-in functions. A new call will always allocate exact one memory block. A makme call will allocate more than one memory blocks to host the direct part and underlying part(s) of the created slice, map or channel values.
- Create maps, slices and anonymous functions with corresponding literals. More than one memory blocks may be allocated in each of the processes. 
- Declare variables
- Assign non-interface values to interface values (when the non-interface value is not a pointer value)
- Concatenate non-constant strings
- Convert strings to byte or rune slices, and vice versa
- Convert integers to strings
- Call the built-in append function (when the capacity of the base slice is not large enough)
- Add a new key-element entry pair into a map (when the underlying hash table needs to be resized)

## Where will memory blocks be allocated on?

For every Go program compiled by the official standard Go compiler, at runtime, each goroutine will maintain a stack, which is a memory segment. It acts as a memory poll for some memory blocks to be allocated from/on. The stack of a goroutine will grow and shrink as needed in goroutine running. The minimum stack size is 2KiB.

There is a global limit of stack size each goroutine may reach. If a goroutine exceeds the limit while growing it stack, the program crashes. Default maximum stack size is 1GB on 64-bit systems, and 250 MB on 32-bit systems. Please note that, by the current official standard Go compiler implementation, the actual allowed maximum stack size is the largest power of 2 which is not larger than then MaxStack setting. So for the default setting, the actual allowed maximum stack size is 512 MiB on 64 bit systems, and 128 MiB on 32-bit systems.

Memory blocks can be allocated on stacks. Memory blocks allocated on the stack of a goroutine can only be used (referenced) in the goroutine internally. They are goroutine localized resources. They are not safe to be referenced crossing goroutines. A goroutine can access or modify the value parts hosted on a memory bloack allocated on the stack of the goroutine without using any data synchronization techniques.

Heap is a singleton in each program. It is a virtual concept. If a memory block is not allocated on any goroutine stack, then we say the memory block is allocated on heap. Value parts hosted on memory blocks allocated on heap can be used by multiple goroutines. In other words, they can be used concurrently. Their uses should be synchronized when needed.

In fact, stacks are not essential for Go programs. Go compiler/runtime can allocate all memory block on heap. Supporting stacks is just to make Go programs run more efficiently:

- allocating memory blocks on stacks is much faster than on heap.
- memory blocks allocated on a stack don't need to be garbage collected 
- stack memory blocks are more CPu cache friendly than heap ones.

## When Can a memory block can be collected? 

Memory blocks allocated for direct parts of package-level variables will never be collected.

The stack of a goroutine will be collected as a whole when the goroutine exits. So there is no need to collect the memory blocks allocated on stack, individually, one by one. Stacks are not collected by the garbage collector.

For a memory block allocated on heap, it can be safely collected only if it is no longer referenced (either directly or indirectly) by all the value parts allocated on the goroutine stacks and the global memory zone. We call such memory blocks as unused memory blocks. Unused memory blocks on heap will be collected by the garbage collector.

```go
var p *int

func main() {
	done := make(chan bool)
	// done will be used in main and the following new goroutine, so it will be allocated on heap

	go func() {
		x, y, z := 123, 456, 789
		_ = z  // z can be allocated on stack safely
		p = &x // For x and y are both ever referenced
		p = &y // by the global p, so they will be both allocated on heap.
		// Now, x is not referenced by anyone, so its memory block can be collected now

		p = nil
		// Now, y is also referenced by anyone, so its memory block can be collected now

		done <- true

	}()

	<-done
	// Now the above goroutine exits, the done channel is not used any more, a smart compiler
	// may think it can be collected now
}
```