# Methods in Go

The receiver of type *T is called pointer receiver, non-pointer receivers are called value receivers. I don't recommend to view the terminology pointer as an opposite of the terminology value, because pointer values are just special values. But, I am not against using the pointer receiver and value receiver terminologies here.

## Implicit Methods With Pointer Receiver

For each method declared for value receiver type T, a corresponding method with the same name will be implicitly declared by compiler for type *T. When we explicit declare a method for a non-pointer value type, in fact two method are declared, the explicit one if for the non-pointer type and the implicit ne is for the corresponding pointer type.

For each explicitly declared method with a value receiver, two implicit functions and one implicit method will also be declared at the same time.

## Method Specifications and Method Sets

Each type has a method set. The method set of a non-interface type is composed of all the method specifications of the methods declared, either explicitly or implicitly.

The method set of type T is always a subset of the method set of type *T.

```go
type person1 struct{}

func (p person1) Printing() {
	fmt.Println("person1")
}

func (p *person1) PointerPrinting() {
	fmt.Println("person1")
}

// method set of type *person1: Printing(), PointerPrinting()
// method set of type person1: Printing()
func main() {
	p := &person1{}
	tp := reflect.TypeOf(p)
	for i := 0; i < tp.NumMethod(); i++ {
		fmt.Println(tp.Method(i).Name)
	}
}
```
The method sets of the following types are always black:

- built-in basic types
- defined pointer types
- pointer types whose base types are inteface or pointer types
- unnamed array, slice, map, function and channel types

When a method is declared for a type, each value of the type will own a member function. Zero values are not exceptions, whether or not the zero values of the types are represented by nil.

```go
type person struct {}

func (p *person) Name() string {
    return "person name"
}

func main() {
    var p *person
    fmt.Println(p.Name()) // ok
}
```

## Receiver Arguments Are Passed by Copy

Same as general function arguments, the receiver are also passed by copy. So, the modifications on the direct part of a receiver argument in a method call will not be reflected to the outside of the method.

```go
package main

import "fmt"

type Book struct {
    pages int
}

func (b Book) SetPages(pages int) {
    b.pages = pages
}

func main() {
    var b Book
    b.SetPages(123)
    fmt.Println(b.pages) // 0
}
```

```go
package main

type Book struct {
    pages int
}

type Books []Book

func (books Books) Modify() {
    // Modifications on the underlying part of the receiver
    // will be reflected to outside of the method
    books[0].pages = 500

    // Modifications on the direct part of the receiver
    // will not be reflected to outside of the method
    books = append(books, Book{789})
}

func main() {
    var books = Books{{123}, {456}}
    books.Modify()
    fmt.Println(books)
}
```

```go
type Books []int

func (b Books) Modify() {
	fmt.Printf("%p\n", &b)
	b = append(b, 101)
	fmt.Printf("%p\n", &b)
	b[0] = 100
}

func main() {
	b := Books(make([]int, 2, 10))
	fmt.Printf("%p\n", &b)
	b[0] = 1
	b[1] = 2

	b.Modify()
}
```
## Method Value Normalization

At compile time, compilers will normalize each method value expression, by changing implicit address taking and pointer dereference operations into explicit ones in that method value expression.

Assume v is a value of type T and v.m is a legal method value expression,

- If m is a method explicitly declared for type *T, then compilers will normalize it as (&v).m;
- If m is a method explicitly declared for type T, then the method value expression v.m is already normalized.

Assume p is a value of type *T and p.m is a legal method value expression,

- If m is a method explicitly declared for type T, then compilers will normalize it as (*p).m;
- If m is a method explicitly declared for type *T, then the method value expression p.m is already normalized.

## Method Value Evaluation

```go
package main

import "fmt"

type Book struct {
    pages int
}

func (b Book) Pages() int {
    return b.pages
}

func (b *Book) Page2() int {
    return (*b).Pages()
}

func main() {
    var b = Book{pages: 123}
    var p = &b
    var f1 = b.Pages
    var f2 = b.Pages
    var g1 = p.Pages2
    var g2 = b.Pages2
    b.pages = 789
    fmt.Println(f1())
    fmt.Println(f2())
    fmt.Println(g1())
    fmt.Println(g2())
}
```

## Should a Method Be Declared With Pointer Receiver or Value Receiver?

Firstly, from the last section, we know that sometimes we must declare methods with pointer receivers

In fact, we can always declare methods with pointer receivers without any logic problems. It is just a matter of program performance that sometimes it is better to declare methods with value receivers.

- Too many pointer copies may cause heavier workload for garbage collector.
- If the size of a value type is large, then the receiver argument copy cost may be no negligible. Pointer types are all small-size types.

If it is hard to make a decision whether a method should use a poniter receiver or a value recever, then just choose the poniter receiver way.