# Interfaces in Go

Fundamentally, interface types make Go support value boxing.

Before Go 1.18 all interface types may be used as value types. But since Go 1.18 some interface types may be only used as type constraints. Interface types which may be used as value types are called basic interface types.

## Interface Types and Type Sets

An interface type defines some (type) requirements. All non-interface types satisfying these requirements form a type set, which is called the type set of the interface type.

## Method Sets of Types

Each type has a method set associated with it.

- For a non-interface type, its method set is composed of the specifications of all the methods (either explicit or implicit ones) declared for it.
- For an interface type, its method set is composed of all the method specifications it specifies, either directly or indirectly through embedding other types.

## Basic Interface Types

Basic interface types are the interface types which may be used as value types. A non-basic interface type is also called a constraint-only interface type.

## Value Boxing

The direct part of the dynamic value of an interface value is immutable, though we can replace the dynamic value of an interface value with another dynamic value.

Go compilers will build a global table which contains the information of each type at compile time. The information includes what kind a type is, what methods and fields a type owns, what the element type of a container type is, type sizes, etc. The global table will loaded into memory when a program starts.

At run time, when a non-interface value is boxed into an interface value, the Go runtime (at least for the standard Go runtime) will analyze and build the implementation information for the type pair of the two values, and store the implementation information in the interface value. The implementation information for each non-interface type and interface type pair will only be built once and cached in a global map for execution efficiency consideration.

## Reflection

The dynamic type information stored in an interface value can be used to inspect the dynamic value of the interface value and manipulate the values referenced by the dynamic value. This is called reflection in programming.

## Type assertion

## Comparisons Interface

In short, two interface values are equal only if one of the following conditions are satisfied

1. They are both nil interface values
2. Their dynamic types are identical and comparable, and their dynamic values are equal to each other.

## Pointer dynamic value vs non-pointer dynamic value

The official Go compiler/runtime makes an optimization which makes boxing pointer values into interface values more efficient than boxing non-interface values. For small size values, the efficiency differences are small, but for large size values, the differences may be not small. For the same optimization, type assertions with a pointer type are also more efficient than type assertions with the base type of the pointer type if the base type is a large size type.

So please try to avoid boxing large size values, box their pointers instead.

