# Code and project organization

## Unintended variable shadowing

The scopes of a variable refers to the places a variable can be referenced: in other words, the part of an application where a name binding is valid. In Go, a variable name declared in a block can be re-declared in an inner block. This principle, called variable shadowing, is prone to common mistakes.

```go
func main() {
	var a int
	a = 1
	{
		a := 2
		fmt.Println(a)
	}
	fmt.Println(a)
    // 2 1
}
```
The following example shows an unintended side effect because of a shadowed variable. It creates an HTTP client in two different ways, depending on the value of a tracing Boolean

```go
func createClient(tracing bool) error {
	var client *http.Client
	if tracing {
        // client is shadowed in this block
		client, err := createClientWithTracing()
		if err != nil {
			return err
		}
		log.Println(client)
	} else {
        // client is shadowed in this block
		client, err := createDefaultClient()
		if err != nil {
			return err
		}
		log.Println(client)
	}
	// client here = nil
}
```

How can we ensure that a value is assigned to the original client variable? There are two different options

The first option uses temporary variables in the inner blocks 

```go
var client *http.Client
if tracing {
    c, err := createClientWithTracing()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    client = c
} else {
    // same logic
}
```

The second option uses the assignment operator (=) in the inner blocks to directly assign the function results to the client variable.

```go
var client *http.Client
var err error
if tracing {
    client, err = createClientWithTracing()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
} else {
    // Same logic
}
```

Variable shadowing occurs when a variable name is re-declared in an inner block, but we saw that this practice is prone to mistakes. Imposing a rule to forbid shadowed variables depends on personal taste.

## Unnecessary  nested code

A critical aspect of readability is the number of nested levels. Let's do an exercise.

```go
func join(s1, s2 string, max int) (string, error) {
    if s1 == "" {
        return "", errors.New("s1 is empty")
    } else {
        if s2 == "" {
            return "", errors.New("s2 is empty")
        } else {
            concat, err := concatenate(s1, s2)
            if err != nil {
                return "", err
            } else {
                if len(concat) > max {
                    return concat[:max], nil
                } else {
                    return concat, nil
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

From an implementation perspective, this function is correct. However, building a mental model encompassing all the different cases is probably not a straight forward task. Because of the number of nested levels.

Try another implementation:

```go
func join(s1, s2 string, max int) (string, error) {
    if s1 == "" {
        return "", errors.New("s1 is empty")
    }
    if s2 == "" {
        return "", errors.New("s2 is empty")
    }
    concat, err := concatenate(s1, s2)
    if err != nil {
        return "", err
    }
    if len(concat) > max {
        return concat[:max], nil
    }
    return concat, nil
}
```

When an if block returns, we should omit the else block is all cases. We shouldn't write

```go
if foo() {
    return true
} else {
}
```

Instead, we omit the else block like this:

```go
if foo() {
    return true
}
//
```

We can also follow this logic with a non-happy path:

```go
if s != "" {
    // ...
} else {
    return errors.New("empty string")
}
```

Here, an empty s represents the non-happy path. Hence we should flip the condition like so:

```go
if s == "" {
    return errors.New("empty string")
}
// ...
```

This new version is easier to read because it keeps the happy path on the left edge and reduces the number of blocks.

**Striving to reduce the number of nested blocks aligning the happy path on the left, and returning as early as possible are concrete means to improve our code's readability.**

## Misusing init functions

```go
package main

import "fmt"

var a = func() int {
    fmt.Println("var") // execute first
    return 0
}()

func init() {
    fmt.Println("init") // execute second
}

func main() {
    fmt.Println("main") //execute last
}
```

We shouldn't rely on the ordering of init functions within a package. Indeed, it can be dangerous as source files can be renamed, potentially impacting the execution order.

First, let's look at an example where using an init function can be considered inappropriate: holding a database connection pool. In the init function in the example, we open a database using sql.Open. We make this database a global variable that other functions can later use:

```go
var db *sql.DB

func init() {
    dsn := ""
    d, err := sql.Open("mysql", dsn)
    if err != nil {
        log.Panic(err)
    }

    err = d.Ping()
    if err != nil {
        log.Panic(err)
    }
    db = d
}
```

Let's describe three main downsides:

- First, error management in an function is limited. Indeed as an init function doesn't return an error, one of the only ways to signal an error is to panic, leading to application to be stopped. In our example, it might be OK to stop the application anyway if opening the database fails. Opening the database within an init function prevents client packages from implementing their error-handling logic.
- Another important downside is related to testing. If we add tests to this file, the init function will be executed before running the test cases, which isn't necessarily what we want. Therefore, the init function in this example complicates writing unit tests.
- The last downside is that the example requires assigning the db connection pool to a global variable. Global variables have some severe drawbacks
    - Any functions can alter global variables within the package.
    - Unit tests can be more complicated because a function that depends on a global variable won't be isolated anymore.

In most cases, we should favor encapsulating a variable rather than keeping it global.

It is necessary to avoid init functions at all costs? Not really. There are still use cases where init function can be helpful. For example, the official Go blog uses an init function to set up the static HTTP configuration:

```go
func init() {
    redirect := func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        http.Redirect(w, r, "/", http.StatusFound)
    }
    http.HandleFunc("/blog", redirect)
    http.HandleFunc("/blog/", redirect)

    static := http.FileServer(http.Dir("static"))
    http.Handle("/favicon.ico", static)
    http.Handle("/fonts.css", static)
    http.Handle("/fonts/", static)
}
```
In this example, the init function cannot fail. Meanwhile, there's no need to create any global variables, and the function will not impact possible unit tests.

Init functions can lead to some issues:

- The can limit error management
- The can complicate how to implement tests
- If the initialization requires us to set a state, that has to be done through global variables. 

We should be cautions with init functions. They can be helpful in some situations, however, such as defining static configuration, as we saw in this section. Otherwise, and in most cases, we should handle initializations through ad hoc functions.

## Overusing getters and setters

Getters and setters are means to enable encapsulation by providing exported methods on top of un-exported object fields.

Using getters and setters presents some advantages, including these:

- They encapsulate a behavior associated with getting or setting a field, allowing new functionality to be added later.
- They hide the internal representation, giving us more flexibility in what we expose.
- They provide a debugging interception point for when the property changes at run time, making debugging easier.

## Interface pollution

Interfaces are one of the cornerstones of the Go when designing and structuring our code. However, like many tools or concepts, abusing them is generally not a good idea. Interface pollution is about overwhelming our code with unnecessary abstractions, making it harder to understand. It's a common mistakes made by developers coming from another language with different habits.

### Concepts

```go
func copySourceToDest(source io.Reader, dest io.Writer) error {
	data := make([]byte, 5)
	source.Read(data)

	dest.Write(data)

	return nil
}

type fileReader struct {
	content []byte
}

func (f fileReader) Read(p []byte) (int, error) {
	for i := 0; i < len(p); i++ {
		p[i] = f.content[i]
	}
	return len(f.content), nil
}

type fileWriter struct {
	content []byte
}

func (w *fileWriter) Write(p []byte) (int, error) {
	for i := 0; i < len(p); i++ {
		w.content = append(w.content, p[i])
	}

	return len(p), nil
}

func main() {
	r := fileReader{
		content: []byte{1, 2, 3, 4, 5},
	}
	w := &fileWriter{}
	copySourceToDest(r, w)

	fmt.Println(w.content)
}
```

The bigger the interface, the weaker the abstraction.

Indeed, adding methods to an interface can decrease its level of reusability. io.Reader and io.Writer are powerful abstractions because they cannot get any simpler. Furthermore, we can also combine fine-grained interfaces to create higher-level abstractions.

Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler. Applied to interfaces, this denotes that finding the perfect granularity for an interface isn't necessarily a straightforward  process.

### When to use interfaces

- Common behavior
- Decoupling
- Restricting behavior

### Interface pollution

Create interfaces before create types isn't how things should work in Go.

Abstractions should be discovered, not created. What does this mean? It means we shouldn't start creating abstractions in our code if there is no immediate reason to do so. We shouldn't design with interfaces but wait for a concrete need. Said differently, we should create an interface when we need it, not when we foresee that we could need it.

What's the main problem if we overuse interfaces? The answer is that they make the code flow more complex. Adding a useless level of indirection doesn't bring any value; it creates a worthless abstraction making the code more difficult to read, understand, and reason about. If we don't have a strong reason for adding an interface and it's unclear how an interface makes a code better, we should challenge this interface's purpose. Why not call the implementation directly?

In summary, we should be cautions when creating abstractions in our code - abstractions should be discovered, not created. It's common for us, software developers, to over-engineer our code by trying to guess what the perfect level of abstraction is, based on what we think we might need later. This process should be avoided because, in most cases, it polluted our code with unnecessary abstractions, making it more complex to read.

Don't design with interfaces, discover them.

### Interface on the producer side

- Producer side: an interface in the same package as the concrete implementation. The interface lives on the producer side.

```go
package foo

type I interface {
    Do()
}

// satisfies I interface
type Impl struct {}
func (i Impl) Do()
```

```go
package bar
import "foo"

type someCode struct {
    i foo.I
}
```

- Consumer side: an interface defined in an external package where it's used. The interface is defined where it's used.

```go
package foo 

type Impl struct {}
func (i Impl) Do() {}
```

```go
package bar

type I interface {
    Do()
}

type someCode struct {
    i I
}
```

```go
package client

type customerGetter interface {
    GetAllCustomer() ([]store.Customer, error) 
}
```

- Because the customersGetter interface in only used in the client package, it can remain un-exported.
- Visually, in the figure, it looks like circular dependencies. However, these's no dependency from store to client because the interface is satisfied implicitly. This is why such an approach isn't always possible in languages with an explicit implementation.

An interface should live on the consumer side in most cases. However, in particular contexts (for example, when we know - not foresee - that an abstraction will be helpful for consumers) we may want to have it on the producer side. If we do, we should strive to keep it as minimal as possible, increasing its reusability potential and making it more easily composable.

### Returning interfaces

While designing a function signature, we may have to return either an interface or a concrete implementation. Let's understand why returning an interface is, in many cases, considered a bad practice in Go.

We will consider two packages:

- Client, which contains a Store interface
- Store, which contains an implementation of Store

```go
package store

type InMemoryStore struct {
}

func NewInMemoryStore() client.Store {
    return InMemoryStore{}
}

package client

type Store interface {
}
```

For example, the client package can't call the NewInMemoryStore function anymore; otherwise, there would be a cyclic dependency. A possible solution could be to call this function from another dependency. A possible solution could be to call this function from another package and to inject a Store implementation to client. However, being obliged to do that means that the design should be challenged.

Returning an interface restricts flexibility because we force all the clients to use one particular type of abstraction.

**Be conservative in what you do, be liberal in what you accept from others.**

If we apply this idiom to Go, it means:

- Returning structs instead of interfaces
- Accepting interfaces if possible

Of course, there are some exeptions. As software engineers, we are familiar with the fact that rules are never true 100% of the time. The most relevant one concerns the error type, an interface returned by many functions. But they are no reasonable for breaking change in error interface.

All in all, in most case, we shouldn't return interfaces but concrete implementations. Otherwise, it can make our design more complex due to package dependencies and can restrict flexibility because all the clients would have to rely on the same abstraction.

### Any says nothing

An any type can hold any value type:

```go
func main() {
    var i any
    i = 42
    i = "foo"
    i = struct{
        s string
    }{
        s: "bar",
    }
    i = f

    _ = i
}
```

In assigning a value to an any type, we lose all type information, which requires a type assertion to get anything useful out of the i variable, as in the previous example.

```go
package store

type Customer struct {
}

type Contact struct {
}

type Store struct {
}

func (s *Store) Get(id string) (any, error) {}
func (s *Store) Set(id string, v any) error {}
```

In summary, any can be helpful if there is a genuine need for accepting or returning any possible type (for instance, when it comes to marshaling or formatting). In general, we should avoid overgeneralizing the code we write at all costs.

### Being confused about when to use generics

```go
func getKeys(m map[string]int) []string {
    var keys []string
    for k := range m {
        keys = append(keys, k)
    }
    return keys
}
```
Before generics, Go developers had a new options: using code generation, reflection, or duplicate code. For example, we could write two functions, one for each map type, or even try to extend getKeys to accept different map types:

```go
func getKeys(m any) ([]any, error) {
    switch t := m.(type) {
        default:
            return nil, fmt.Errorf("unknown type: %T", t)
        case map[string]int:
            var keys []any 
            for k := range t {
                keys = append(keys, k)
            }
            return keys, nil
        case map[int]string:
            // Copy the extraction logic
    }
}
```

It increases boilerplate code. Indeed, when we want to add a case, it requires duplicating the range loop. Meanwhile, the function now accepts an any type, which means we lose some of the benefits of Go as a typed language. Indeed, checking whether a type if supported is done at run time instead of compile time.

```go
func getKeys[K comparable, V any](m map[K]V) []K {
	var rs []K
	for v := range m {
		rs = append(rs, v)
	}

	return rs
}
```

Restricting type arguments to match specific requirements is called a constraint. A constraint is an interface type that can contain:
- A set of behavior (methods)
- Arbitrary types

```go
type customConstraint tinterface {
    ~int | ~string
}
```

**~int vs .int**

What's the different between a constraints using ~int or one using int? Using int restricts it to that type, whereas ~int restricts all the types whose underlying type is an int.

```go
func main() {
	var t adapter = 1
	conv(t)
}

func conv[K customConstraint](k K) string {
	return k.String()
}

// adapter is an ~int and implements the String() method, the customInt type satisfies the defined constraint.
type adapter int

func (adapter) String() string {
	return "adapter"
}

type customConstraint interface {
	~int
	String() string
}
```

So far, we have discussed examples using generics for functions. However, we can also use genercis with data structures. For example, we can create a linked list containing values of any type.

```go
type Node[T any] struct {
	Val  T
	next *Node[T]
}

func (n *Node[T]) Add(next *Node[T]) {
	n.next = next
}

func traverse[T any](node *Node[T]) {
	cur := node
	for cur.next != nil {
		fmt.Println(cur.Val)
		cur = cur.next
	}
	fmt.Println(cur.Val)
}

func main() {
	newNode := &Node[int]{
		Val:  0,
		next: nil,
	}
	n1 := &Node[int]{
		Val:  1,
		next: nil,
	}
	newNode.Add(n1)
	n1.Add(&Node[int]{
		Val:  2,
		next: nil,
	})

	traverse(newNode)
}
```

One last thing to note about type parameters is that they can't be used with method arguments, only with function arguments or method receivers.

If we want to use generics with methods, it's the receiver that needs to be a type parameter.

### Common uses and missues

When are generics useful? Let's discuss a few common uses where generics are recommended:

- Data structures - We can use generics to factor out the element type if we implement a binary tree, a linked list, or a heap
- Functions working with slices, maps and channels of any type - A function to merge two channels would work with any channel type

```go
func merge[T any](ch1, ch2 <-chan T) <-chan T {
	rs := make(chan T, len(ch1)+len(ch2))
	go func() {
		for v := range ch1 {
			rs <- v
		}
	}()
	go func() {
		for v := range ch2 {
			rs <- v
		}
	}()

	return rs
}
```

### Not being aware of the possible problems with type embedding

When creating a struct, Go offers the option to embed types. But this can sometimes lead to unexpected behaviors if we don't understand all the implications of type embedding. Throughout this section, we look at how to embed types, what these bring, and the possible issues.

In Go, a struct field is called embedded if it's declared without a name

```go
type Foo struct {
    Bar
}

type Bar struct {
    Baz int
}

var foo = Foo{}
foo.Baz = 42
```
In the Foo, the Bar type is declared without an associated name; hence, it's an embedded field.

We use embedding to promote the fields and methods of and embedded type.

Note that Baz is available from two different paths: either from the promoted one using Foo.Baz or from the nominal one via Bar, Foo.Bar.Baz. Both relate to the same field.

**Interfaces and embedding**

Embedding is also used within intefaces to compose an interace with others. 

```go
type ReadWriter interface {
    Reader
    Writer
}
```

In the following, we implement a struct that holds some in-memory data, and we want to protect it against concurrent accesses using a mutex:

```go
type InMem struct {
    sync.Mutex // embedded field
    m map[string]int
}

func New() *InMem {
    return &InMem{m: make(map[string]int)}
}
```

Because the mutex is embedded, we can directly access the Lock and Unlock methods from the i receiver.

```go
m := inmem.New()
m.Lock() // ?
```

This promotion is probably not desired. A mutex is, in most cases something that we want to encapsulate within a struct and make visible to external clients. Therefore, we shouldn't make it an embedded field in this case:

```go
type InMem struct {
    mu sync.Mutex
    m map[string]int
}
```

We want to write a custom logger that contains an io.WriteCloser and exposes two methods, Write and Close. If io.WriteCloser wasn't embedded, we would need to write it like so:

```go
type Logger struct {
    writeCloser io.WriteCloser
}

func (l Logger) Write(p []byte) (int, error) {
    return l.writeCloser.Write(p)
}

func (l Logger) Close() error {
    return l.writeCloser.Close()
}
```

Logger would have to provide both a Write and Close method that would only forward the call to io.WriteCloser. However, if the field now becomes embedded, we can remove these forward methods:

```go
type Logger struct {
    io.WriteCloser
}
```

If we decide to use type embedding, we need to keep two main constraints in mind:

- It shouldn't be used solely as some syntactic sugar to simplify accessing field (such as Foo.Baz() instead of Foo.Bar.Baz()). If this is the only rationale, let's not embed the inner type and use a field instead.
- It shouldn't promote data (fields) or a behavior (methods) we want to hide from the outside 

### Not using the functional options pattern
