# Functions and methods

- When to use value or pointer receivers.
- When to use named result parameters and their potential side effects.
- Avoiding a common mistake while returning a nil receiver.
- Why using functions that accept a filename isn't a best practice.
- Handling defer arguments.

## 42. Not knowning which type of receiver to use

Choosing a receiver type for a method isn't always straightforward. When should we use value receiver? When should we use pointer receivers? In this section, we look at the conditions to make the right decision.

In many contexts, using a value or pointer receiver should be dictated not by performance, but rather by other conditions that we will discuss.

In Go, we can attach either a value or a pointer receiver to a method. With a value receiver, Go makes a copy of the value and passed it to the method. Any changes to the object remain local to the method. The original object remains unchanged.

On the other hand, with a pointer receiver, Go passes the address of an object to the method. It remains a copy, but we copy a pointer, not the object itselft (passing by reference doesn't exist in Go). Any modifications to the receiver are done on the original object. Here is the same example, but now the receiver is a pointer:

```go
type customer struct {
    balance float64
}

func (c *customer) add(operation float64) {
    c.balance += operation
}

func main() {
    c := customer{balance: 100.0}
    c.add(50.0)
    fmt.Printf("balance: %.2f\n", c.balance)
}
```

Choosing between value and pointer receivers isn't always straightforward.

**A receiver must be a pointer**

- If the method needs to be mutate the receiver. This rule is also valid if the receiver is a slice and a method needs to append elements:

```go
type slice []int

func (s *slice) add(element int) {
    *s = append(*s, element)
}
```

- If the method receiver contains a field that cannot be copied: for example, a type part of the sync package

**A receiver should be a pointer**

- If the receiver is a large object. Using a pointer can make the call more efficient, as doing so prevents making an extensive copy. When in doubt about how large is large, benchmark can be the solution; it's pretty much impossible to state a specific size, because it depends on many factors.

**A receiver must be a value**

- If we have to enforce a receiver's immutability.
- If the receiver is a map, function, or channel. Otherwise, a compilation error occurs.

**A receiver should be a value**

- If the receiver is a slice that doesn't have to be mutated.
- If the receiver is a small array or struct that is naturally a value type without mutable fields, such as time.Time. 
- If the receiver is a basic type such as int, float64, or string.

```go
type customer struct {
	data *data
}

type data struct {
	balance float64
}

func (c customer) add(operation float64) {
	c.data.balance += operation
}

func main() {
	c := customer{
		data: &data{
			balance: 0,
		},
	}
	c.add(50)
	fmt.Println(c.data.balance)
}
```

balance isn't part of the customer struct directly but is in a struct referenced by a pointer field.

In this case, we dont need to receiver to be a pointer to mutate balance. However, for clarity, we may favor using a pointer receiver to highlight that customer as a whole object is mutable.

**Mixing receiver types**

Are we allowed to mix receiver types, such as a struct containing multiple methods, some of which have pointer receivers and others of which have value receivers? The consensus tends toward forbidding it. However, there are some counterexamples in the standard library, for example, time.Time. The designers wanted to enforce that a time.Time struct is immutable. Hence, most methods such as After, IsZero and UTC have a value receiver. But to a comply with existing interfaces such as encoding.TextUnmarshaler, time.Time has to implement the UnmarshalBinary([]byte) , which mutates the receiver given a byte slice. Thus this method has a pointer receiver.

Consequently, mixing receiver types should be avoided in general but is not forbidden in 100% of cases.

By default, we can choose to go with a value receiver unless there's a good reason not to do so. In doubt, we should use a pointer receiver. 

## 43. Never using named result parameters

Named result parameters are an infrequently used option in Go. This section looks at when it's considered appropriate to use named result parameters to make our API more convenient. But first, let's refresh our memory about how they work.

When a result parameter is named, it's initialized to its zero value when the function/method begins. With named result parameters, we can also call a naked return statement (without arguments).

```go
func f(a int) (b int) {
    b = a
    return
}
```

In this example, we attach a name to the result parameter: b. When we call return without arguments, it returns the current value of b.

When is it recommended that we use named result parameters? First, let's consider the following interface, which contains a method to get the coordinates from a given address:

```go
type locator interface {
    getCoordinates(address string) (float32, float32, error)
}
```
Because this interface is unexported, documentation isn't mandatory. Just by reading this code, can you guess what these two float32 results are? Perhaps they are a lat and a lng, but in which order? Depending on the conventions, lat isn't always the first element. Therefore, we have to check the implementation to understand the results.

In that case, we should probably use named result parameters to make the code easier to read:

```go 
type locator interface {
    getCoordinates(address string) (lat, lng float32, err error)
}
```

**NOTE** If we need to return multiple results of the same type, we can also think about creating an ad hoc struct with meaningful field names. However, this isn't always possible: for example, when satisfying an existing interface that we can't update.

When to use named result parameters depends on the context. In most cases, if it's not clear whether using them makes our code more readable, we shouldn't use named result parameters.

Also note that having the result parameters already initialized can be quite handy in some contexts, even though they don't necessarily help readability. The following example proposed in Effective Go is inspired by io.ReadFull function:

```go
func ReadFull(r io.Reader, buf []byte) (n int, err error) {
    return
}
```

In this example, having named result parameters doesnt really increase readability. However, because both n and err are initialized to their zero value, the implementation is shorter.

Another case is in defer.

If we're not careful enough, using named result parameters can lead to side effects and unintended consequences, as we see in the next section.

## 44. Unintended side effects with named result parameters

We mentioned why named result parameters can be useful in some situations. But as these result parameters are initialized to their zero value, using them can sometimes lead to subtle bugs if we're not careful enough. This section illustrates such a case.

Let's enhance our previous example of a method that returns the latitude and longitude from a given address.

```go
func (l loc) getCoordinates(ctx context.Context, address string) (lat, lng float32, err error) {
    isValid := l.validateAddress(address)
    if !isValid {
        return 0, 0, errors.New("invalid address")
    }

    if ctx.Err() != nil {
        return 0, 0, err
    }
    // Get and return coordinates
}
```

The error might not be obvious at first glance. Here, the error returned in the if ctx.Err() != nil scope is err. But we haven't assigned any value to the err variable. It's still assigned to the zero value of an error type: nil. Hence, this code will always return a nil error.  

Furthermose, this code compiles because err was initialized to its zero value due to named result parameters. Without attaching a name, we would have gotten the following compilation error:

```txt
Unresolved reference 'err'
```

One possible fix is to assgin ctx.Err() to err like so:

```go
if err := ctx.Err(); err != nil {
    return 0, 0, err
}
```

We keep returning err, but we first assign it to the result of ctx.Err(). Note that err in this example shadows the result variable.

**Using a naked return statement**

Another option is to use a naked return statement:

```go
if err = ctx.Err(); err != nil {
    return
}
```

However, doing so would break the rule starting that we shouldn't mix naked returns and returns with arguments. In this case, we should probably stick with the first option. Remember that using named result parameters doesn't necessarily mean using naked returns. Sometimes we can just use named result parameters to make a signature clearer.

Each parameter is initialized to its zero value. As we have seen in this section, this can lead to subtle bugs that aren't always straightforward to spot while reading code. Therefore, let's remain cautions when using named result parameters, to avoid potential side effects.

## 45. Returning a nil receiver

```go
type MultiError struct {
	errs []string
}

func (m *MultiError) Add(err error) {
	m.errs = append(m.errs, err.Error())
}

func (m *MultiError) Error() string {
	return strings.Join(m.errs, ";")
}
```
MultiError satisfies the error interface because it implements Error() string. Meanwhile, it exposes an Add method to append an error.

```go
type Customer struct {
	Name string
	Age  int
}

func (c Customer) Validate() error {
	var m *MultiError

	if c.Age < 0 {
		m = &MultiError{}
		m.Add(errors.New("age is negative"))
	}
	if c.Name == "" {
		if m == nil {
			m = &MultiError{}
		}
		m.Add(errors.New("name is nil"))
	}

	return m
}
```

In this implementation, m is initialized to the zero value of *MultiError: hence, nil. When a sanity check fails, we allocate a new MultiError if needed and then append an error. In the end, we return m, which can be either a nil pointer or a pointer to a MultiError struct, depending on the checks.


```go
func main() {
	customer := Customer{
		Name: "John",
		Age:  33,
	}
	if err := customer.Validate(); err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("customer is invalid: %v", err)
	}
}
```

Here is the output:

```txt
customer is invalid: <nil>
```

This result may be pretty surprising. The Customer was valid, yet the err != nil condition was true, and logging the error printed <nil>. So, what's the issue?

In Go, we have to know that a pointer receiver can be nil. Let's experiment by creating a dummy type and calling a method with a nil pointer receiver.

```go
type Foo struct{}

func (foo *Foo) Bar() string {
     return "bar"
}

func main() {
    var foo *Foo
    fmt.Println(foo.Bar())
}
```

foo is initialized to the zero value of pointer: nil. But this code compiles, and it prints bar if we run it. A nil pointer is a valid receiver. 

But why is this the case? In Go, a method is just syntatic sugar for a function whose first parameter is the receiver. Hence, the Bar method we've seen is similar to this function:

```go
func Bar(foo *Foo) string {
    return "bar"
}
```

We know that passing a nil pointer to a function is valid. Therefore, using a nil pointer as a receiver is also valid.

In above example, m is initialized to the zero value of a pointer: nil. Then, if all the checks are valid, the argument provided to the return statement isn't nil directly but a nil pointer. Because a nil pointer is a valid receiver, converting the result into an interface won't yield a nil value. In other words, the caller of Validate will always get a non-nil error.

**To make this point clear, let's remember that in Go, an interface is a dispatch wrapper. Here, the wrappee is nil (the MultiError pointer), whereas the wrapper isn't (the error interface)**

We've seen in this section that in Go, having a nil receiver is allowed, and an interface converted from a nil pointer isn't a nil interface. For that reason, when we have to return an interface, we should return not a nil pointer but a nil value directly. Generally, having a nil pointer isn't a desirable state and means a probable bug.

We saw an example with errors throughput this section because this is the most common case leading to this error. But this problem isn't only tied to errors: it can happen with any interface implemented using pointer receivers.

## 46. Using file name as a function input

When creating a new function that needs to read a file, passing a filename isn't considered a best practice and can have negative effects, such as making unit tests harder to write.

```go
func countEmptyLinesInFile(filename string) (int, error) {
    file, err := os.Open(filename)
    if err != nil {
        return 0, err
    }
    // Handle file closure

    scanner := bufio.NewScanner(file)
    for scanner.Scan() {
    }
}
```

Each unit test will require creating a file in our Go project. The more complex the function is, the more cases we may want to add, and the more files we will create. We may have to create dozens of files in some cases, which can quickly become unmanageable.

Furthermore, this function isn't reusable. For example, if we had to implement the same logic but count the number of empty lines with an HTTP request, we would have to duplicate the main logic:

```go
func countEmptyLinesInHTTPRequest(request http.Request) (int, error) {
    scanner := bufio.NewScanner(request.Body)
    // Copy the same logic
}
```

One way to overcome thse limitations might be to make the function accept a *bufio.Scanner (the output returned by bufio.NewScanner). Both functions have the same logic from the moment we create the scanner variable, so this approach would work. But in Go, the idiomatic way is to start from the reader's abstraction.

Let's write a new version of the countEmptyLines function that receives an io.Reader abstraction instead:

```go
func countEmptyLines(reader io.Reader) (int, error) {
    scanner := bufio.NewScanner(reader)
    for scanner.Scan() {
        // ...
    }
}
```

What are the benefits of this approach? First, this function abstracts the data source. Is it a file? An HTTP request? A socket input? It's not important for the function. Because *os.File and the Body field of http.Request implement io.Reader, we can reuse the same function regardless of the input type.

Another benefit is related to testing. We mentioned that creating one file per test case could quickly become cumbersome. Now that countEmptyLines accepts an io.Reader, we can     implement unit tests by creating an io.Reader from a string:

```go
emptyLines, err := countEmptyLines(strings.NewReader(`
    foo
        bar
            baz
    `))
// Test logic
```

In this test, we create an io.Reader using strings.NewReader from a string literal directly. Therefore, we don't have to create one file per test case. Each test case can be self-contained, improving the test readability and maintainability as we don't have to open another file to see the content.

Accepting a filename as a function input to read from a file should, in most cases, be considered a code smell (except in specific functions such as os.Open). As we've seen, it makes unit tests more complex because we may have to create multiple files. It also reduces the reusability of a function (although not all functions are meant to be reused). Using the io.Reader interface abstracts the datasource. Regardless of whether the input is a file, a string, an HTTP request, or a gRPC request, the implementation can be reused and easily tested.

## 47. Ignoring how defer arguments and receivers are evaluated.

We mentioned in a previous section that the defer statement delays a call's execution until the surrounding is not understanding how arguments are evaluated. We will delve into this problem with two subsections: one related to function and method arguments and the second related to method receivers.

### Argumnet evaluation

To illustrate how arguments are evaluated with defer, let's work on a concrete example.

```go
func baz() error {
	var status string
	defer notify(status)
	defer incrementCounter(status)

	if err := foo(); err != nil {
		status = StatusErrorFoo
		return err
	}
	if err := bar(); err != nil {
		status = StatusErrorBar
		return err
	}
	status = StatusSuccess

	return nil
}

func bar() error {
	return errors.New("is bar")
}

func foo() error {
	return errors.New("is foo")
}

func notify(status string) {
	fmt.Println("notify", status)
}
func incrementCounter(status string) {
	fmt.Println("incrementCounter", status)
}
```

However, if we give this function a try, we see that regardless of the execution path, notify and incrementCounter are always called with the same status: an empty string. How is this possible?

We need to understand something crucial about argument evaluation in a defer function: the arguments are evaluated right away, not once the surrounding function returns. In our example, we call notify (status) and incrementCounter (status) as defer functions. Therefore, Go will delay these calls to be executed once f returns with the current value of status at the stage we used defer, hence passing an empty string. How can we solve this problem if we want to keep using defer?

The first solution is to pass a string pointer to the defer functions:

```go
func f() error {
    var status string
    defer notify(&status)
    defer incrementCounter(&status)
}
```

We keep updating status depending on the cases, but now notify and incrementCounter receive a string pointer. Why does this approach work?

Using defer evaluated the arguments right away: here, the address of status. Yes, status itself is modified throughout the function, but its address remains constant, regardless of the assignments. Hence, if notify or incrementCounter uses the value referenced by the string pointer. But this solution requires changing the signature of the two functions, which may not always be possible.

There's another solution: calling a closure as a defer statement. As a reminder, a closure is an anonymous function value that references variables from outside its body. The arguments passed to a defer function are evaluated right way. But we must know that the variables referenced by a defer closure are evaluated during the closure execution.

```go
i, j := 0, 0
defer func(i int) {
    fmt.Println(i, j)
}(i)
i++
j++
```

Therefore, we can use a closure to implement a new version of our function:

```go
func f() error {
    var status string
    defer func() {
        notify(status)
        incrementCounter(status)
    }()
}
```

Here, we wrap the calls to both notify and incrementCounter within a closure. This closure references the status variable from outside its body. Therefore, is evaluated once the closure is executed, not when we call defer.

### Pointer and value receivers

```go
func main() {
    s := Struct{id: "foo"}
    defer s.print()
    s.id = "bar"
}

type Struct struct{
    id string
}

func (s *Struct) print() {
    fmt.Println(s.id)
}
```

The s receiver is also evaluated immediately. However, calling the method leads to copying the pointer receiver. Hence, the changes made to the struct referenced by the pointer are visible.
