# Error management

Error management is a fundamental aspect of building robust and observable applications, and it should be as important as any other part of a codebase. In Go, error management doesn't rely on the traditional try/catch mechanism as most programming languages do. Instead errors are returned as normal return values.

## 48. Panicking

It's pretty common for Go newcomers to be somewhat confused by functions or methods that return an error type as the last parameter. But some developers may find this approach surprising and be tempted to reproduce exception handling in languages such as Java or Python using panic and recover.

In Go, panic is a built-in function that stops the ordinary flow:

```go
func main() {
    fmt.Println("a")
    panic("foo")
    fmt.Println("b")
}
```

This code prints a and then stops before printing b:

```txt
a
panic: foo

goroutine 1 [running]:
main.main()
    main.go:7 +0xb3
```

Once a panic is triggered, it continues up the call stack until either the current goroutine has returned or panic is caught with recover:

```go
func main() {
    defer func() {
        if r := recover(); r != nil {
            fmt.Println("recover", r)
        }
    }()

    f()
}

func f() {
    fmt.Println("a")
    panic("foo")
    fmt.Println("b")
}
```

In the f function, once panic is called, it stops the current execution of the function and goes up the call stack: main. In main, because the panic is caught with recover, it doesn't stop the goroutine.

```txt
a
recover foo
```

Note that calling recover() to capture a goroutine panicking is only useful inside a defer function; other wise, the function would return nil and have no other effect. This is because defer functions are also executed when the surrounding function panics. 

```go
func checkWriteHeaderCode(code int) {
    if code < 100 || code > 999 {
        panic(fmt.Sprintf("invalid writeHeader code %v", code))
    }
}
```

This function panics if the status code is invalid, which is a pure programmer error.

Another example based on a programmer error and be found in the database/sql package while registering a database driver:

```go
func Register(name string, driver driver.Driver) {
    driversMu.Lock()
    defer driversMu.UnLock()
    if driver == nil {
        panic("sql: Register driver is nil")
    }
    if _, dup := drivers[name]; dup {
        panic("sql: Register called twice for driver " + name)
    }
    drivers[name] = driver
}
```

This function panics if the driver is nil (driver.Driver is an interface) or has already been register. Both cases would again be considered programmer errors. Register is called via an init function, which limits error handling. For all these reasons, the designers made the function panic in case of an error.

Another use case in which to panic is when an application requires a dependency but fails to initialize it.

Panicking in Go should be used sparingly. We have seen two prominent cases, one to signal a programmer error and another where our application fails to create a mandatory dependency. Hence, there are exceptional conditions that lead us to stop the application. In most other cases, error management should be done with a function that returns a proper error type as the last return argument.

## 49 .Ignore when to wrap an error

Since Go 1.13 the %w directive allows to to wrap errors conveniently. But some developers may be confused about when to wrap an error (or not). So, let's remind ourselves what error wrapping is and then when to use it. 

Error wrapping is about wrapping or packing an error inside a wrapper container that also makes the source error available. The two main use cases for error wrapping are the following: 

- Adding additional context to an error
- Making an error as a specific error

[Wrap the error inside a wrapper](./assets/wrapper_error.png)

We receive a request from a specific user to access a database source, but we get a permission denied error during the query. For debuggine purposes, if the error is eventually logged, we want to add extra context.

```go
err := errors.New("permission denied")
wrapper := fmt.Errorf("When user X tried to access resource Y %w", err)
```

Now let's say that instead of adding context, we want to mark the error. For example, we want to implement an HTTP handler that checks whether all the errors received while calling functions are of a Forbidden type so we can return a 403 status code. In that case, we can wrap this error inside Forbidden

```go
err := errors.New("permission denied")
wrapper := fmt.Errorf("Forbidden %w", err)
```

In both cases, the source remains available. Hence, a caller can also handle an error by unwrapping it and checking the source error. Also note that sometimes we want to combine both approaches: **adding context and marking an error.**

```go
func main() {
	fmt.Println(Foo())
}

func Foo() error {
	err := errors.New("permission denied")
	if err != nil {
		return BarError{err} // err is wrapped inside BarError
	}
	return nil
}

// Before Go 1.13, to wrap an error, the only option without using an external library was to create a custom error type
type BarError struct {
	Err error
}

func (b BarError) Error() string {
	return "bar failed:" + b.Err.Error()
}
```

The benefit of this option is its flexibility. Because BarError is a custom struct, we can add any additional context if needed. However, being obliged to create a specific error type can quickly become cumbersome if we want to repeat this operation.

To overcome this situation, Go 1.13 introduced the %w directive.

```go
if err != nil {
    return fmt.Errorf("bar failed: %w", err)
}
```

This code wraps the source error to additional context without having to create another error type.

Because the source error of remains available, a client can unwrap the parent error and then check whether the source error was of a specific type or value.

The last option we will discuss to the use the %v directive

```go
if err != nil {
    return fmt.Errorf("bar failed: %v", err)
}
```

The difference is that the error itself isn't wrapped. We transform it into another error to and context, and the source error is no longer available.

The information about the source of the problem remains available. However, a caller can't unwrap this error and check whether the source was bar error. So, in a sense, this option is more restrictive than %w.

Wrapping an error makes the source error available for callers. Hence, it means introducing potential coupling. For example, imagine that we use wrapping and the caller of Foo checks whether the source error is bar error. Now, what if we change our implementation and use another function that will return another type of error? It will break the error check made by the caller.


To make sure our clients don't rely on something that we consider implementation details, the error returned should be transformed, not wrapped. 

|Option|Extra context|Marking an error|Source error available|
|-|-|-|-|
|Returning error directly|No|No|Yes|
|Custom error type|Possible|Yes|Possible|
|fmt.Errorf with %w|Yes|No|Yes|
|fmt.Errorf|Yes|No|No|

To summarize, when handling an error, we can decide to wrap it. Wrapping to about adding additional context to an error and/or marking an error as a specific type. If we need to mark an error, we should create a custom error type. However, if we just want to add extra context, we should use fmt.Errorf with the %w directive as it doesn't require creating a new error type. Yet, error wrapping creates potential coupling as it makes the source error available for the caller. If we want to prevent it, we shouldn't use error wrapping but error transformation, for example, using fmt.Errorf with the %v directive. 

## 50. Checking an error type inaccurately

The previous section introduced a possible way to wrap errors using the %w directive. However, when we use that approach, it's also essential to change our way of checking for a specific error type; otherwise, we may handle errors inaccurately.

Let's discuss a concrete example. We will write an HTTP handler to return the transaction amount from an ID. Our handler will parse the request to get the ID and retrieve the amount from a database (DB). Our implementation can fail in two cases:

- If the ID is invalid (string length other than five characters).
- If querying the DB fails.

In the former  case, we want to return StatusBadRequest (400), whereas in the later, we want to return ServiceUnavailable (503). To do so, we will create a transientError type to mark that an error is temporary. The parent handler will check the error type. If the parent handler error will check the error type. If the error is a transientError, it will return 503 status code; otherwise, it will return a 400 status code.

```go
type transientError struct {
	err error
}

func (t transientError) Error() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("transient error: %v", t.err)
}

func getTransactionAmount(transactionID string) (float32, error) {
	if len(transactionID) != 5 {
		return 0, fmt.Errorf("id is invalid: %s", transactionID)
	}

	amount, err := getTransactionAmountFromDB(transactionID)
	if err != nil {
		return 0, transientError{err: err}
	}

	return amount, nil
}
func getTransactionAmountFromDB(transitionID string) (float32, error) {
	if len(transitionID) == 5 {
		return 0, errors.New("record not found")
	}
	return 5.0, nil
}
```

getTransactionAmount returns an error using fmt.Errorf if the identifier is invalid. However, if getting the transaction amount from the DB fails, getTransactionAmount wraps the error into a transientError type.

Now, let's write the HTTP handler that checks the error type to return the appropriate HTTP status code:

```go
func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    transitionID := r.URL.Query().Get("transaction")

    amount, err := getTransactionAmount(transitionID)
    if err != nil {
        switch err := err.(type) {
            case transientError:     
                http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusServiceUnavailable)
            default:
                http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusBadRequest)
        }
        return
    }

    // response
}
```

Using a switch on the error type, we return the appropriate HTTP status code: 400 in the case of a bad request or 503 in the case of the transient error. 

This code is perfectly valid. However, let's assume that we want to perform a small refactoring of getTransactionAmount. The transientError will be returned by getTransactionAmountFromDB instead of getTransactionAmount. getTransactionAmount now wraps this error using the %w directive: 

```go
func getTransactionAmount(transitionID string) (float32, error) {
    // Check transaction ID validity
    amount, err := getTransactionAmountFromDB(transitionID)
    if err != nil {
        return 0, fmt.Errorf("failed to get transaction %s: %w", transactionID, err)
    }
    return amount, nil
}
```

If we run this code, it always returns a 400 regardless of the error case, so the case Transient error will never be hit. How can we explain this behavior?

Before the refactoring, transientError was returned by getTransactionAmount. After the refactoring, transientError is not returned by getTransactionAmountFromDB.

What getTransactionAmount returns isn't a transientError directly; it's an error wrapping transientError. Therefore case transientError is not false.

For that exact purpose, Go 1.13 came with a directive to wrap an error and a way to check whether the wrapped error is of a certain type with errors.As. This function recursively unwraps an error and returns true if an error in the chain matches the expected type.

```go
if err != nil {
    if errors.As(err, &transientError{}) {
        fmt.Println("transientError", err)
    } else {
        fmt.Println("Bad request", err)
    }

    return
}
```

errors.As requires the second argument (the target error) to be a pointer. Otherwise, the function will compile but panic at runtime. Regardless of whether the runtime error is directly a transientError type or an error wrapping transientError, errors.As returns true; hence, the handler will return a 503 status code.

## 51. Checking an error value inaccurately

This section is similar to the previous one but with sentinel errors (error values). First, we will define what a sentinel error conveys. Then, we will see how to compare an error to a value.

A sentinel error is an error defined as a global variable:

```go
import "errors"

var ErrFoo = errors.New("foo")
```

Sentinel errors are user defined errors that indicated very specific events that you, as a developer anticipate & identify as adequately important to define and specify. As such, you declare them at the package level and, in doing so, imply that your package functions may return these errors (thereby committing you in the future to maintain these errors as others depending on your package will be checking for them).

In general, the convention is to start with Err followed by the error type: here, ErrFoo. A sentinel error conveys an expected error. But what do we mean by an expected error? Let's discuss it in the context of an SQL library.

We want to design a Query method that allows us to execute a query to a database. This method returns a slice of rows. How should we handle the case when no rows are found? We have two options:

- Return a sentinel value: for example, a nil slice (think about strings.Index, which returns the sentinel value - 1 if a substring isn't present).
- Return a specific error that a client can check.

Let's take the second approach: our method can return a specific error if no rows are found. We can classify this as an expected error, because passing a request that returns no rows is allowed. Conversely, situations like network issues and connection polling errors are unexpected errors. It doesn't mean we don't want to handle unexpected errors; it means that semantically, those errors convey a different meaning.

If we take a look at the standard library, we can find many examples of sentinel errors:

- sql.ErrNoRows - returned when a query doesn't return any rows (which was exactly our case)
- io.EOF - returned by an io.Reader when no more input is available

That's the general principle behind sentinel errors. They convey an expected error that clients will expect to check. Therefore, as general guidelines,

- Expected errors should be designed as error values (sentinel errors): var ErrFoo = errors.New("foo")
- Unexpected errors should be designed as error types: type BarError struct {}, with BarError implementing the error interface.

Let's get back to the common mistake. How can we compare an error to a specific value? By using the == operator:

```go
err := query()
if err != nil {
    if err == sql.ErrNoRows {

    } else {

    }
}
```

Here,  we call a query function and get an error. Checking whether the error is an sql.ErrNoRows is done using the == operator.

However, just as we discussed in the previous section, a sentinel error can also be wrapped. If an sql.ErrNoRows is wrapped using fmt.Errorf and the %w directive, err == sql.ErrNoRows will always be false.

Again, Go 1.13 provides an answer. We have seen how errors.As is used to check an error against a type. With error values, we can use its counterpart: errors.Is. Let's rewrite the previous example:

```go
err := query()
if err != nil {
    if errors.Is(err, sql.ErrNoRows) {

    } else {

    }
}
```

Using errors.Is instead of the == operator allows the comparison to work even if the error is wrapped using %w.

## 52. Handling an error twice

Handling an error multiple times is a mistake made frequently by developers, not specifically in Go. Let's understand why this is a problem and how to handle errors effectively.

```go
type Route struct{}

func GetRoute(srcLat, srcLng, dstLat, dstLng float32) (Route, error) {
   err := validateCoordinates(srcLat, srcLng)
   if err != nil {
      log.Println("failed to validate source coordinates")
      return Route{}, err
   }
   err = validateCoordinates(dstLat, dstLng)
   if err != nil {
      log.Println("failed to validate target coordinates")
      return Route{}, err
   }

   return Route{}, nil
}

func validateCoordinates(lat, lng float32) error {
	if lat > 90.0 || lat < -90.0 {
		log.Printf("invalid latitude: %f", lat)
		return fmt.Errorf("invalid latitude: %f", lat)
	}
	if lng > 180.0 || lng < -180.0 {
		log.Printf("invalid longitude: %f", lng)
		return fmt.Errorf("invalid longitude: %f", lng)
	}

	return nil
}
```

Having two log lines for a single error is problem. Why? Because it makes debugging harder. For example, if this function is called multiple times concurrently, the two messages may not be one after the other in the logs, making the debugging process more complex.

As a rule of thumb, an error should be handled only once. Logging an error is handling an error, and so is returning an error.  Hence, we should either log or return an error, never both.

Let's rewrite our implementation to handle errors only once:

```go
func GetRoute(srcLat, srcLng, dstLat, dstLng float32) (Route, error) {
    err := validateCoordinates(srcLat, srcLng)
    if err !=  nil {
        return Route{}, err
    }
    err = validateCoordinates(dstLat, dstLng)
    if err != nil {
        return Route{}, err
    }
}

func validateCoordinates(lat, lng float32) error {
    if lat > 90.0 || lat < 90.0 {
        return fmt.Errorf("invalid latitude: %f", lat)
    }
    if lng > 180.0 || lng < -180.0 {
        return fmt.Errorf("invalid longitude: %f", lng)
    }
    return nil
}
```

In this version, each error is handled only once by being returned directly. Then, assuming that caller of GetRoute is handling the possible errors with logging, the code will output the following message in case of an invalid latitude:

Is this new Go version of the code perfect? Not really. For example, the first implementation led to two logs in case of an invalid latitude. Still, we knew which call to validateCoordinates was failing: either the source or target coordinates. Here, we lose this information, so we need to additional context to the error.

Let's rewrite the latest version of our code using Go 1.13 error wrapping.

```go
func GetRoute(srcLat, srcLng, dstLat, dstLng float32) (Route, error) {
    err := validateCoordinates(srcLat, srcLng)
    if err != nil {
        return Route{}, fmt.Errorf("failed to validate source coordinates: %w", err)
    }

    err = validateCoordinates(dstLat, dstLng)
    if err != nil {
        return Route{}, fmt.Errorf("failed to validate target coordinates: %w", err)
    }
}
```

Each error returned by validateCoordinates is now wrapped to provide additional context for the error: whether it's related to the source or target coordinates. So if we run this new version, here's the caller logs in case of an invalid source latitude:

With this version, we have covered all the different cases: a single log, without losing any valuable information. In additional, each error is handled only once, which simplifies our code by, for example, avoiding repeating error messages.

Handling an error should be done only once. As we have seen, logging an error is handling an error. Hence, we should either log or return an error. By doing this, we simplify our code and gain better insights into the error situation. Using error wrapping is the most convenient approach as it follows us to propagate the source and add context to an error.

## 53. Not handling an error

```go
func f() {
	notify()
}

func notify() error {
	return nil
}
```

Before we want to ignore the error, in this example, we just call notify without assigning its output to a classic err variable. There's nothing wrong this code from a functional standpoint: it compiles and runs as expected.

However, from a maintainability perspective, the code can lead to some issues. Let's consider a new reader looking at it. This reader notices that notify returns an error but that the error isn't handled by the parent function. How can they guess whether or not handling the error was intentional? How can they know whether the previous developer forgot to handle it or did it purposely?

```go
_ = notify()
```

Instead of not assigning the error to a variable, we assgin it to the blank identifier. In terms of compilation and run time, this approach doesn't change anything compared to the first piece of code. But this new version makes explicit that we aren't interested in the error.  

A comment can also accompany such code, but not a comment like the following that mentions ignoring the error:

```go
// Ignore the error
_ = notify()
```

This comment just duplicates what the code does and should be avoided. But it may be a good idea to write a comment that indicates that retionale why the error is ignored

```go
// At-most once delivery.
// Hence, it's accepted to miss some of them in case of errors.
_ = notify()
```

## 54. Not handling defer errors

Not handling errors in defer statements is a mistake that's frequently made by Go developers. Let's understand what the problem is and the possible solutions.

In the following example, we will implement a function to query to DB to get the balance given a customer ID.

```go
func getBalance(db *sql.DB, clientID string) (float32, error){
    rows, err := db.Query(query, clientID)
    if err != nil {
        return 0, err
    }
    defer rows.Close()
    // use rows
}
```

rows is a *sql.Rows type. It implements the Closer interface:

```go
type Closer interface {
    Close() error
}
```

This interface contains a single Close method that returns an error. We mentioned in the previous section that errors should always be handled.

A discussed in the previous section, if we don't want to handle the error, we should ignore it explicitly using the blank identifier:

```go
defer func() {
    _ = rows.Close()
}()
```

This version is more verbose but is better from a maintainability perspective as we explicit mark that w are ignoring the error.

But in such a case, instead of blindy ignoring all errors from defer calls, we should ask ourselves whether that is the best approach. In this case, calling close() returns an error when it fails to free a DB connection from the pool. Hence, ignoring this error is probably not what to do. Most likely, a better option would be to log a message:

```go
defer func(){
    err := rows.Close()
    if err != nil {
        log.Printf("failed to close rows: %v", err)
    }
}()
```
Now, if closing rows fails, the code will log a message so we're aware of it.

If we want to tie the error returned by getBalance to the error caught in the defer call, we must use named result parameters.

```go
func getBalance(db *sql.DB, clientID string) (balance float32, err error) {
    rows, err := db.Query(query, clientID)
    if err != nil {
        return 0, err
    }
    defer func() {
        err = rows.Close()
    }()

    return
}
```

Above code has some bug. We need to implement this logic:

- If rows.Scan succeeds,
    - If rows.Close succeeds, return no error.
    - If rows.Close fails, return this error.
- If rows.Scan fails
    - If rows.Close succeeds, return the error from rows.Scan
    - If rows.Close fails ... then what?

If both rows.Scan and rows.Close fail, what should we do? There are several options. For example, we can return a custom error that conveys two errors. Another option, which we will implement, is to return the rows.Scan error but log the rows.Close error.

```go 
defer func(){
    closeErr := rows.Close()
    if err != nil {
        if closeErr != nil {
            log.Printf("failed to close rows: %v", err)
        }
        return
    }
    err = closeErr
}()
```
