# Concurrency Foundations

## 55. Mixing up concurrency and parallelism

Even after years of concurrent programming, developers may not clearly understand the differences between concurrency and parallelism. Before delving into Go-specific topics, it's first essential to understand these concepts so we share a common vocabulary.

Concurrency enables parallelism. Indeed, concurrency provides a structure to solve a problem with parts that may be parallelized.

Concurrency is about dealing with a lot of things at once. Parallelism is about doing lots of things at once.

In summary, concurrency and parallelism are different. Concurrency is about structure, and we can change a sequential implementation into a concurrent one by introduction different steps that separate concurrent threads can tackle. Meanwhile, parallelism is about execution, and we can use it at the step level by adding more parallel threads.

## 56. Thinking concurrency is always faster

A misconception among many developers is believing that a concurrent solution is always faster than a sequential one. This couldn't be more wrong. The overall performance of a solution depends on many factors, such as the efficiency of our structure (concurrency), which parts can be tackled in parallel and the level of contention among the computation units.

### Go scheduling

A thread is the smallest unit of processing that an OS can perform. If a process wants to execute multiple actions simultaneously, it spins up multiple threads. These threads can be

- Concurrent - Two or more threads can start, run, and complete in overlapping time periods
