# Benchmark Tools

You don't have to roll your own benchmark system, and in fact you shouldn't unless there's a good reason why you can't use one of the available ones.

## Full-Stack Tools

Recall that there are two types of benchmarks: full-stack and single-component. There are tools to benchmark full applications, and there are tools to stress-test MySQL and other components in isolation.

**ab**

ab in an Apache HTTP server benchmarking tool. It shows how many requests per second your HTTP server is capable of serving. If you are benchmarking a web application, this translates to how many requests per second the entire application can satisfy. It's very simple tool, but its usefulness is limited because it just hammers one URL as fast as it can.

**http_load**

This tool is similar in concept to ab; it is also designed to load a web server, but it's more flexible. You can create an input file with many different URLs, and http_load will choose from among them at random. You can also instruct it to issue requests at a timed rate, instead of just running them as fast as it can.

**JMeter**

JMeter is a Java application that can load another application and measure its performance. It was designed for testing web applications, but you can also use it to test FTP servers and issue queries to database via JDBC.

JMeter is much more complex than ab and http_load. For example, it has features that let you simulate real users more flexibly, by controlling such parameters as ramp-up time. It has a graphical user interface with built-in result graphing, and it offers the ability to record and replay results offline.

**wrk**

wrk is a modern HTTP benchmarking tool capable of generating significant load wehn run on a single multi-core CPU. It combines a multithreaded design with scalable event notification systems such as epoll and kqueue.

An optional LuaJIT script can perform HTTP request generation, response processing, and custom reporting.

The machine running wrk must have a sufficient number of ephemeral ports available and closed sockets should be recycled quickly. To handle the initial connection burst the server's listen(2) backlog should be greater than the number of concurrent connections being tested.

## Single-Component Tools

**mysqlslap**

mysqlslap simulates load on the server and reports timing information. You can specify how many concurrent connections it should use, and you can give it either a SQL statement on to run. If you don't give it statements, it can also autogenerate SELECT statements by examining the server's schema.

**MySQL Benchmark Suite (sql-bench)**

MySQL distributes its own benchmark suite with the MySQL server, and you can use it to benchmark several different database servers. It is single-threaded and measures how quickly the server executes queries. The results show which types of operations the server performs well.


**sysbench**

sysbench is multithreaded system benchmarking tool. Its goal is to get a sense of system performance, in terms of the factors important for running a database server. For example, you can measure the preformance of file I/O, the OS scheduler, memory allocation and transfer speed, POSIX threads, and the database server itself. sysbench supports scripting in the Lua language, which makes it very flexible for testing a variety of scenarios. It is our favorite all-around benchmarking tool for MySQL, operating system, and hardware performance. 

**MySQL's BENCHMARK() Function**

MySQL has a handy BENCHMARK() function that you can use to test execution speeds for certain types of operations. You use it by specifying a number of times to execute and an expression to execute. The expression can be any scalar expression, such as scalar subquery or a function. This is convenient for testing the relative speed of some operations.

```sql
 SELECT BENCHMARK(1000, (SELECT MAX(name_varchar) FROM datatype));
+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| BENCHMARK(1000, (SELECT MAX(name_varchar) FROM datatype)) |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| 0                                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+
1 row in set
Time: 0.011s
```

One of the authors made this mistake and found that 10,000 executions of a certain expression ran just as fast as 1 execution. It was a cache it. In general, this type of behavior should always make you suspect either a cache hit or an error.

