# Models

A model is the single, definitive source of information about your data. It contains the essential fields and behaviors or the data you're storing. Generally, each model maps to a single database table. 

The basics:

- Each model is a Python class that subclasses django.db.models.Model
- Each attribute of the model represents a database field.
- With all of this, Django gives you an automatically-generated database-access API.

```py
class Person(models.Model):
    first_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=30)

# first_name and last_name are fields of the model.
# Each field is specified as a class attribute, and each attribute maps to a database column.
```

```py
CREATE TABLE api_person (
    "id" bigint NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY,
    "first_name" varchar(30) NOT NULL,
    "last_name" varchar(30) NOT NULL
);
```

## Using models

Once you have defined your models, you need to tell Django you're going to use those model. Do this by editing your settings and changing the INSTALLED_APPS setting to add the name of the module the contains your models.py.

For example, if the models for your application live in the module myapp.models (the package structure that is created for an application by the manage.py startapp script)

```py
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    "api"
]
```

```txt
python manage.py makemigrations
python manage.py migrate
```

## Fields

The most important part of a model - and the only required part of a model - is the list of database fields it defines. Fields are specified by class attributes. Be careful not to choose field names that conflict with the models API like clean, save, or delete.

### Field types

### Field options

**primary_key**

If True, this field is the primary key for the model. If you don't specify primary_key=True for and field in your model, Django will automatically add an IntegerField to hold the primary key, so you don't need to set primary_key=True on any of your fields unless you want to override the default primary-key behavior.

### Relationships
