# Virtual Environment and Packages

## 12.1. Introduction

Python applications will often use packages and modules that don't come as part of the standard library. Applications will sometimes need a specific version of a library, because the application may require that a particular bug has been fixed or the application may be written using an obsolete version of the library's interface.

This means it may not be possible for one Python installation to meet the requirements of every application. If application A needs 1.0 of a particular module but application B needs version 2.0, then the requirements are in conflict and installing either version 1.0 and 2.0 will leave one application unable to run.

The solution for this problem is to create a virtual environment, a self-contained directory tree that contains a Python installation for a particular version of Python, plus a number of additional packages.

Different applications can then use different virtual environments. To resolve the eariler example of conflicting requirements, application A can have its own virtual environment with version 1.0 while application B has another virtual env with version 2.0. If application B requires a library be upgrade to version 3.0, this will not affect application A's env.

## 12.2. Creating Virtual Environment

The module used to create and manage virtual env is called venv. venv will usually install the most recent version of Python that you have available. If you have multiple versions of Python on your system, you can select a specific Python version by running python3 or whichever version you want.

```sh
python -m venv .venv
```

## 12.3. Managing Packages with pip

You can install, upgrade, and remove packages using a program called pip. By default pip will install packages from the Python Package Index.

pip has a number fo subcommands "install", "uninstall", "freeze"
