# 5. Data structures

## 5.1. More on Lists

### 5.1.1. Using Lists as Stacks

The list methods make it very easy to use a list as a stack, where the last element added is the first element retrieved ("last-in", "first-out"). To add an item to the top of the stack, use append()

To retrieve an item from the stack, use pop() without an explicit index

```py
stack = [3, 4, 5]
stack.append(6)
stack.append(7)

print(stack)
```

### 5.1.2. Using Lists as Queues

It is also possible to use a list as a queue, where the first element added is the first element retrieved (first-in, first-out); however, lists are not efficient for this purpose. While appends and pops from the end of list are fast, doing inserts or pops from the beginning of a list is slow (because of the other elements have to be shifted by one).

### 5.1.3. List Comprehensions

Provide a concise way to create lists. Common applications are to make new lists where each element is the result of some operations applied to each member of another sequence or iterable.

```py
squares = []
for x in range(10):
    squares.append(x**2)

print(squares)
```

Note that this creates (or overwrites) a variable named x that still exists after the loop completes. We can calculate the list of squares without any side effects using:

```py
squares = list(map(lambda x: x**2, range(10)))
```

or, equivalently:

```py
squares = [x**2 for x in range(10)]
```

```py
list = [(x, y) for x in [1, 2, 3] for y in [3, 1, 4] if x != y]
print(list)
```

If the expression is a tuple, it must be parenthesized.

```py
vec = [-4, -2, 0, 2, 4]
double = [x * 2 for x in vec]
print(double)
tmp = []
for x in vec:
    tmp.append(x * 2)
print(double)
print("~" * 20)

double = [x * 2 for x in vec if x >= 0]
print(double)
tmp = []
for x in vec:
    if x >= 0:
        tmp.append(x * 2)
print(tmp)
print("~" * 20)

# apply a function to all the elements
absx = [abs(x) for x in vec]
print(absx)
tmp = []
for x in vec:
    tmp.append(abs(x))
print(tmp)
print("~" * 20)

tmp = [(x, x**2) for x in range(6)]
print(tmp)

tmp = []
for x in range(6):
    tmp.append((x, x**2))
print(tmp)


vec = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]
list = [num for elem in vec for num in elem]
print(list)

tmp = []
for elem in vec:
    for num in elem:
        tmp.append(num)
print(tmp)
```

### 5.1.4. Nested List Comprehensions

## 5.2. The del statement

```py
a = [-1, 1, 66.25, 333, 333, 1234.5]
del a[0]

print(a)
```

## 5.3. Tuples and Sequences

```py
t = 12345, 54321, "hello!"
u = t, "axy"

print(u)
```

On output tuples are always enclosed in parentheses, so that nested tuples are interpreted correctly

Though tuples may seem similar to lists, they are often used in different situations and for different purposes. Tuples are immutable, and usually contain a heterogeneous sequence of elements that are accessed via unpacking or indexing. Lists are mutable, and their elements are usually homogeneous and are accessed by iterating over list.

## 5.4. Sets

A set is an unordered collection with no duplicate elements. To create an empty set you have use set(), not {}; the latter creates an empty dict

```py
a = set("ac")
b = set("abcd")
print(a, b)

print(a - b)
print(a | b)
print(a & b)
print(a ^ b)
```

## 5.5. Dict

Another useful data type built into Python is the dictionary. Dictionaries are sometimes found in other languages as "associative memories" or "associative arrays". Unlike sequences, which are indexed by a range of numbers, dict are indexed by keys, which can be any immutable type; strings and number can always be keys. Tuples can be used as keys if they contain only strings, numbers or tuples; if a tuple contains any mutable object either directly or indirectly, it cannot be used a key. You can't use lists as keys, since lists can be modified in place using index assignments, slice assignments, or methods like append() and extend().

A pair of braces creates and empty dictionary: {}.

The main operations on a dictionary are storing a value with some key and extracting the value given the key. It is also possible to delete a key:value pair with del. If you store using a key that is already is use, the old value associated with that key is forgotten. It is an error to extract a value using a non-existent key.

## Looping Techniques

## More on Conditions
