# 9. Classes

Classes provide a means of bundling data and functionality together. Creating a new class creates a new type of object, allowing new instances of that type to be made. Each class instance can have attributes to it for maintaining its state. Class instances can also have methods (defined by its class) for modifying its state. Class instances can also have methods (defined by its class) for modifying its state. 

## 9.1. A Word About Names and Objects

Objects have individuality and multiple names (in multiple scopes) can be bound to the same object.

## 9.2. Python Scopes and Namespaces

Classes introduce a little bit of new syntax, three new object types, and some new semantics.

## 9.3.1. A First Look at Classes

## 9.3.2. Class Objects

Class objects support two kinds of operations: attribute references and instantiation.

Atribute references: obj.name. Valid attribute names are all the names that were in the class's namespace when the class object was created.

```py

```
## 9.3.3. Instance Objects

## 9.3.4. Method Objects

## 9.3.5. Class and Instance Variables

Generally speaking, instance variables are for data unique to each instance and class variables are for attributes and methods shared by all instances of the class:

```py
kind = "canine"  # class variable shared by all instances

def __init__(self, name):
    self.name = name


if __name__ == "__main__":
    d = Dog("Fido")
    e = Dog("Buddy")
    print(d.kind, d.name)
    print(e.kind, e.name)
```

A discussed in A Word About Names and Objects, shared data can have possibly surprising effects with involving mutable objects such as lists and dictionaries.

```py
class Dog:
    tricks = []  # mistaken use of a class variable

    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name

    def add_trick(self, trick):
        self.tricks.append(trick)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    d = Dog("Fido")
    e = Dog("Buddy")
    d.add_trick("roll over")
    e.add_trick("play dead")
    print(d.tricks)
```

Correct design of the class should use an instance variable instead:

```py
class Dog:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
        self.tricks = []

    def add_trick(self, trick):
        self.tricks.append(trick)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    d = Dog("Fido")
    e = Dog("Bubby")
    d.add_trick("roll over")
    e.add_trick("play dead")
    print(d.tricks)
    print(e.tricks)
```

## 9.4. Random Remarks

If the same attribute name occurs in both an instance and in a class, then attribute lookup prioritizes the instance:

```py
class Warehouse:
    purpose = 'storage'
    region = 'west'
```

## 9.5. Inheritance

```py
class DerivedClassName(BaseClassName):
```

## 9.6. Private Variables

"Private" instance variables that cannot be accessed from inside an object don't exist in Python. However, there is a convention that is followed by most Python code: a name prefixed with an underscore (e.g. _spam) should be treated as a non-public part of the API (whether it is a function, a method or a data member).

```py

```

## 9.7. Odds and Ends


