# Operating Systems

## Linux

### Linux Fundamentals

https://www.guru99.com/unix-linux-tutorial.html

#### What is Linux

Linux is an operating system or a kernel distributed under an os license. Its functionality list is quite like UNIX. The kernel is a program at the heart of the Linux operating system that takes care of fundamental stuff, like letting hardware communicate with software.

Hardware (CPU,Memory, Hard Drive) -> Operating System (windows, linux) -> end user.

**1. Why do you need an OS?**

OS or kernel which connect you and hardware. To work on your computer, you need an OS. In fact, you are using one as you read this on your computer. Now you may have used popular OS's Windows, Apple OS X, but here we will learn introduction to Linux os.

**2. Who created Linux?**

Linus Torvarlds

**3. Linux get its due attention**

The main advantage of Linux was that programmers were able to use the Linux Kernel to design their own custom operating systems.

**4. Benefits of Linux**

- Being open-source, anyone with programming knowledge can modify it.
- It is easy to learn Linux for beginners.
- The Linux os now offer millions of programs/applications and Linux software to choose from.
- Once you have Linux installed you no longer need an antivirus! Linux is a highly secure system.
- Linux freeware is the OS of choice for Server env. A Linux based server could run non-stop without a reboot for years on end.

#### Linux command line Tutorial

- To manage your files, you can use either the GUI (File manager) or the CLI (Terminal) in Linux. Both have its relative advantages.

#### Basic Linux/Unix commands

|Command|Description|
|-|-|
|ls -R|show all the files not only in directories but also sub-directories|
|ls -al|gives detailed information of the files. The command provides information in a columnar format|
|cat filename1 filename2|to view a file|
|cat filename1 filename2 > newfilename|copy content from filename1 + "\n" + filename2 -> newfilename|
|mv filename newFilename|moving and re-naming file|
|rmdir|removing directories|
|man||
|pr|formatting the file for printing on the terminal|

#### File permissions in Linux: How to Read, Write & Change?

Linux is a clone of UNIX, the multi-user os which can be accessed by many users simultaneously. Linux can also be used in mainframes and servers without any modifications. Linux divides authorization into 2 levels: ownership, permission

**Linux file ownership**

- User: a user is the owner of the file. By default, the person who created a file becomes its owner.
- Group: A user-group can contain multiple users. All users belong to a group will have the same Linux group permissions access to the file.
- Other: Any other user who has access to a file

**Linux file permissions**

Every file and directory in your UNIX/Linux system has following 3 permissions defined for all the 3 owners discussed above.

- Read: This permission give you the authority to open and read a file. Read permission on a directory gives you the ability to list its content.
- Write: The write permission gives you the authority to modify the contents of a file. The write permission on a directory gives you the authority to add, remove and rename files stored in the directory. Consider a scenario where you have to write permission on file but do not have write permission on the directory where the file is stored. You will able to modify the file contents. But you will not be able to rename, move or remove the file from the directory.
- Execute: In UNIX/Linux, you cannot run a program unless the execute permission is set. If the execute permission is not set, you might still be able to see/modify the program code (provided read & write) but not run it.

-rw-rw-r--
drw-rw-r--

-: file type
d: directory

Group 3/1 => user/group/other

Changing file/directory permissions in Linux Using 'chmod' command

**Summary**

- Linux being a multi-user system uses permissions and ownership for security
- There are three user types on a Linux system viz.User, Group and Other
- Linux divides the file permissions into read, write, execute denoted by r, w, and x
- The permissions on a file can be changed by chmod command which can be further divided into Absolute and Symbolic mode
- The chown command can change the ownership of a file/directory.

#### Linux IO redirection in Linux/UNIX examples

**output redirection**

The > symbol is used for output (STDOUT) redirection.

If you do not want to be overwrite but want to add more content to an existing file, then you should use >>  operator.

**input redirection**

The < symbol is used for input (STDIN) redirection

**File Descriptors(FD)**

In Linux/UNIX, everything is a file. Regular file, directories, and even devices are files. Every file has an associated number called File Descriptor (FD).

Your screen also has a FD. When a program is executed the output is sent to FD of the screen, and you see program output on your monitor. If the output is sent to File Descriptor of the printer, the program output would have been printed. 

**Error Redirection**

Whenever you execute a program/command at the terminal, 3 files are always open, viz, standard input, standard output, standard error.

|File|FD|
|-|-|
|STDIN|0|
|STDOUT|1|
|STDERR|2|

**Why Error Redirection**

Error re-direction is one of the very popular features of UNIX/Linux

You do NOT want error message clustering up the normal program output. The solution is to re-direct the error messages to a file.

```bash
myprogram 2>errorsfile
```

#### Pipe, Grep and Sort Command in Linux/UNIX with examples

The Pipe is a command in Linux that lets you use two or more commands such as output of one command serves as input to the next. In short, the output of each process directly as input to the next one like a pipeline. The symbol | denotes a pipe. 

Pipes help you mash-up two or more commands at the same time and run them consecutively. You can use powerful commands which can perform complex tasks.

grep -i: search case-insensitive

#### List of Env variables in Linux/UNIX

|Variable|Description|
|-|-|
|PATH|This variable contains a colon (:) - separated list of directories in which your system looks for executable files. When you enter a command on terminal, the shell looks for the command in different directories mentioned in the $PATH variable. If the command if found, it executes. Otherwise, it returns with an error command not found|
|USER|The username|
|HOME|Default path to the user's home directory|
|TERM|Default terminal emulator|
|SHELL|Shell being used by the user|

#### Linux/UNIX ssh, ping, ftp, telnet communication commands

**SSH**
SSH which stands for secure shell, it is used to connect to a remote computer securely. Compare to telnet, ssh is secure wherein the client/server connection is authenticated using a digital certificate and passwords are encrypted.

**Ping**
To check whether your connection to the server is heathy or not.

**FTP**
FTP is file transfer protocol. It's the most preferred protocol for data transfer amongst computers

You can use FTP to

- Logging in and establishing a connection with a remote host
- Upload and download files
- Navigating through directories
- Browsing contents of the directories

**Telnet**
Telnet helps to
- connect to a remote Linux computer
- run program remotely and conduct administrator

#### Key different between Telnet and SSH

- Telnet is standard TCP/IP protocol for virtual terminal service, while SSH or Secure Shell is a program to log into another computer over a network to execute commands in a remote machine.
- Telnet is vulnerable to security attacks while SSH helps you to overcome many security issues of Telnet.
- Tenet use port 23, which was designed specifically for local area network, whereas SSH runs on port 22 by default.
- Telnet transfers the data in plain text while SSH data is sent in encrypted format via a secure channel.
- Telnet is suitable for private networks. On the other hand SSH is suitable for public networks.

#### Linux/UNIX process management: ps, kill, top, df, tree, nice commands

An instance of a program is called a Process. In simple terms, any command that you give to your Linux machine starts a new process.

**Type of processes**
- Foreground processes: They run on screen and need input from the user.
- Background processes: They run on background and usually do not need user input



## UNIX

### What is Unix os

UNIX is an os system family that originated in the late 1960s at AT&T Bell Labs. It has had a significant influence on modern computing and has served as the foundation for various os, including Linux.

## Notes

**1. Compare Linux and Unix**

- Origin and History:

    - Unix: Unix was one of the earliest os and laid the foundation for many modern os concepts.
    - Linux: Linux was inspired by Unix design principle and aimed to provide a freely available and customizable os.

- Licensing:

    - Unix: Unix os were typically proprietary and came with commercial licenses.
    - Linux: Linux is open source and distributed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) or other open-source licenses. It can be freely used, modified and distributed

In summary, while Unix and Linux share similarities and both adhere to Unix design principles, they are distinct in terms of licensing, development, kernel, distribution models, and historial context. Linux is a specific open-source kernel, while Unix refers to a family of os, both propriately and open-source.

