# Session Hijacking

When a website successfully authenticates a user, the browser and the server open a session. A session is an HTTP conversation in which the browser sends a series of HTTP requests recognizes them as coming from the same authenticated user without requiring the user to log back in for each request.

If a hacker can access or forge session information that the browser sends, they can access any user's account on your site. Modern web servers contain secure session-management code, which makes it practically impossible for an attacker to manipulate or forge a session. However, even if there are no vulnerabilities in a server's session-management capabilities, a hacker can still someone else's vali session while it's in progress; this is called session hijacking.

Session hijacking vulnerabilities are generally a bigger risk than the authentication vulnerabilities discussed in the previous chapter. They allow an attacker to access any of your user's accounts.

## How Sessions Work

To understand how an attacker hijacks a session, you first need to understand what happens when a user and web server open a session. 

When a user authenticates themselves under HTTP, the web server assigns them as session identifier during the login process. The session identifier (session ID) - typically a large, randomly generated number. The web server recognizes the session ID supplied with each request, maps it to the appropriate user, and performs actions on their behalf.

Note that the session ID must be a temporarily assigned value that's different from the username. If the browser used a session ID that was simply the username. If the browser used a session ID that was simply the username, hackers could pretend to be any user they pleased.

Besides the username, the web server typically stores other session state alongside the session ID, containing relevant information about the user's recent activity. The session state might, for example, contain a list of pages the user has visited...

Now that we understand what happens when users and web servers open a session, let's look at how websites implement these sessions. There are two common implementations, typically described as server-side sessions and client-side sessions.

### Server-Side Sessions

In a traditional model of session managment, the web server keeps the session state in memory, and both the web server and browser pass the session identifier back and forth.

Historically, web servers have experimented with transferring session IDs in multiple ways: either in the URL, as an HTTP header, or in the body of HTTP requests. By far, the most common (and reliable) mechanism the web development community has decided upon is to send session IDs as a session cookie. When using session cookies, the web server returns the session ID in the Set-Cookie header of the HTTP response, and the browser attaches the same information to subsequent HTTP requests using the Cookie header.

Server-side sessions have been widely implemented and are generally very secure. They do have scalability limitations, however, because the web server has to store the session state in memory. That means that at authentication time, only one of the web servers will know about the established session. If subsequent web requests for the same user gets directed to different web server, the new web server needs to be able to recognize the returning user, so web servers need a way of sharing session information.

Typically, this require  writing session state to a shared cache or to a database with every request, and having each web server read that cached session state when a new HTTP request comes through. Both of these are time-and resource-consuming operations that can limit the responsiveness of sites with large userbases.

### Client-side Sessions

Because server-side sessions have proven difficult to scale for large sites, web server developers invented client-side sessions. A web server implementing client-side sessions passes all session state in the cookie, instead of passing back just the session ID in the Set-Cookie header. The server serializes session state to text before the session state is set in the HTTP header.

By using client-side sessions, a site's web servers no longer have to share state. Each web server has everything it needs to reestablish the session with an incoming HTTP request. This is great bonus when you're trying to scale to thousands of simultaneous users!

Client-side sessions do create an obvious security problem. With a naive implementation of client-side sessions, a malicious user can easily manipulate the contents of a session cookie or even forge them entirely. This means the web server has to encode the session state in a way that prevents meddling.

One popular way to secure client-side session cookies is to encrypt the serialized cookie before sending it to the client. This approach makes the session state entirely opaque on the client side. Any attempt to manipulate or forge the cookie will corrupt the encoded session and make the cookie unreadable. The server will simply log out the malicious user and redirect them to an error page.

Another, slightly more lightweight approach to securing session cookies is to add digital signature to the cookie as it's sent. A digital signature acts as a unique "fingerprint" for some input data - in this case, the serialized session state - that anyone can easily recalculate as long as they have the signing key originally used to generate the signature. Digitally signing cookies allows the web server to detect attempts to manipulate the session state, since it'll calculate a different signature value and reject the session if there has been any tampering.

## How Attacker Hijack Sessions

### Cookie Theft

Attackers normally achieve session hijacking by stealing the value of a Cookie header from an authenticated user. Attackers usually steal cookies by using one of three techniques: injecting malicious JS into a site as the user interacts with it (XSS), sniffing network traffic in order to intercept HTTP headers (a man-in-the-middle attack), or triggering unintended HTTP requests to the site when they've already authenticated (CSRF).

Fortunately, modern browsers implement simple security measures that allow you to protect your session cookies against all three of these techniques.

```txt
Set-Cookie: session_id=1234; HttpOnly; Secure; SameSite=Lax
```

#### Cross-Site Scripting

To defuse session hijacking via cross-site scripting, mark all cookies as HttpOnly in the Set-Cookie header. This tells the browser not to make cookies available to JavaScript code. Append HttpOnly keyword to the Set-Cookie response header.

There's rarely a good reason to allow client-side JavaScript access to cookies, so there are very few downsides to this approach.

#### Man-in-the-Middle Attacks

An attacker can also steal cookies by using a man-in-the-middle attack: the attacker finds a way to sit between the browser and the web server and read network traffic as it passed back and forth. To protect against cookie theft via man-in-the-middle attacks, your website should use HTTPS. You'll learn how to enable HTTPS after.

After you've enabled HTTPS on the web server, you should mark your cookies as Secure. So the browser knows to never send unencrypted cookies over HTTP.

```txt
Set-Cookie: session_id=1234; Secure
```

#### Cross-site Request Forgery

The final way an attacker can hijack sessions is via cross-site request forgery. An attacker using CSRF doesn't need to get access to a user's session cookie. Instead, they simply need to trick the victim into clicking a link to your site. If the user already has a session open on your site, the browser will send their session cookie along with the HTTP request trigger by the link, which might result in the user inadvertently performing a sensitive action (such as Liking an item the hacker is attempting to promote).
