# Permissons

Facebook suffered a disastrous failure in user permissions in September 2018, when hackers exploited a bug in its video uploading tool to generate access tokens for the site. Up to 50m user accounts on the site were compromised. Hackers stole private profile details like user's names, emails, and phone numbers. Facebook patched the bug, issued a security advisory, and did an apology tour via the press.

The Facebook hack was an example of privilege escalation, whereby a malicious user usurps the permissions of another user. The process of securing your site so the correct privileges are applied to each user is called implementing access control. 

The Facebook hack was an example of privilege escalation, whereby a malicious user usurps the permissions of another user. The process of securing your site so the correct privileges are applied to each user is called implementing access control.

## Privilege Escalation

Security experts divide privileges escalation attacks into two categories: vertical and horizontal escalation.

In vertical escalation, an attacker gets access to an account with broader permissions than their own. If an attacker can deploy a web shell on your server - an executable script that takes elements of the HTTP request and runs them on the command line - one of their first aims will be escalate their way to root privilege, so they can perform any actions they wish on the server.

In horizontal escalation, an attacker accesses another account with similar privileges as their own.

To secure your site from escalation attacks, you need to securely implement access for all sensitive resources.

## Access control

Your access control strategy should cover three key aspects:

**Authentication** Correctly identifying a user when they return to the site.
**Authorization** Deciding which actions a user should and shouldn't be able to perform after they've identified themselves.
**Permission checking** Evaluating authorization at the point in time when a user attempts to perform an action.

A good access control strategy consists of three stages: designing an authorization model, implementing the access control, and testing the access control. After you've done that, you can also add audit trails and make sure you haven't missed common oversights.

### Designing an Authorization Model

**Access Control Lists**

ACLs are a simple way of modeling authorization that attach against each object in your system a list of permissions, specifying the actions that each user or account can perform on that object. The canonical example of an ACL-based model is the Linux filesystem, which can individual grant each user read, write or execute permissions on each file and directory. Most SQL databases also implement ACL-based authorization.

**Whitelists and Blacklists**

A simpler way to model authorization is to use a whitelist or blacklist. A whitelist describes the users or accounts that can access a particular resource, and bans all other users. A blacklist explicitly describes the user or accounts that are banned from accessing a resource, implying that the resource should be made accessible to any other user or account.

**Role-Based Access Control**

Probably the most comprehensive authorization model is role-based access control (RBAC), which grants users roles, or adds users to groups that it has granted specific roles. Policies in the system define how each role can interact with specific subjects - resources within the computing system.

**Ownership-Based Access Control**


