# Injection Attacks

Injection attacks, which occur when the attacker injects external code into an application in an effort to take control of the application or read sensitive data.

However, it's perfectly possible for a browser to generate unexpected HTTP requests to a server. In addition, web servers happily accept HTTP requests from any type of client, not just browsers.

A programmer equipped trary URLs on the internet.

Sever-side code has no reliable way of telling whether a script or a browser generated an HTTP request, because the contents of the HTTP request are indistinguishable regardless of the client. The best a server can do is to check the User-Agent header, which is supposed to describe the type of agent that generated the request, but scripts and hacking tools typically spoof the contents of this header, so it matches what a browser would send.

Knowing all of this, hackers attacking a website frequently pass malicious code in an HTTP request so that it tricks the server into executing the code. This is the basic of an injection attack on a website.

## SQL injection

## Command injection

## Remote code execution

So far, you've seen how vulnerabilities can creep in when web code constructs a call to databases, as with SQL injection, or to the os it's running on, as with command injection. In other circumstances, attackers can inject malicious code to be executed in the language of the web server ifself, a tactic called remote code execution. Remote code execution attacks on websites are rarer than the injection attacks we discussed earlier, but every bit as dangerous.

### Anatomy of a Remote Code Execution Attack

### Mitigration: Disable Code Execution During Deserialization

## File update vulnerabilities

## Summary

In this chapter, you learned about various injection attacks, whereby an attacker crafts malicious HTTP requests to take control of backend systems.

SQL injection attacks take advantage of web code that doesn't securely construct SQL injection by using bind parameters when communicating with the database driver.

Command injection attacks take advantage of code that makes insecure calls to os functions. You can similarly defuse command injection through correct use of binding.

Remote code execution vulnerabilities allow hackers to run exploits inside the web server process itself, and typically stem from insecure serialization libraries. Make sure to stay on top of any security advisories for the serialization libraries you use.

You can mitigate the risks around all types of injection attacks by following the principle of least privilege: processes and software components should run with only the permissions they require to perform their assigned tasks, and no more. This approach reduces the harm an attack can do if they inject harmful code. Examples of following the principle of least priviledge include limiting file and network access for your web server process, and connecting to your database unber an account with limited permissions.
