# Cross-site scripting attacks

In the previous chapter, you saw how attackers can inject code into web servers to compromise websites. If your web server is secure, a hacker's next best injection target is the web browser. If an attacker can find a way to inject malicious JavaScript into a user's browser while the user views your website, that user is in for a bad time. We call this type of code injection a cross-site scripting (XSS) attach.

JavaScript can read or modify any part of a web page, so there's a lot on attacker can do with cross-site script vulnerabilities. They can steal login credentials or other sensitive information like credit card numbers as the user types them in. Cross-site scripting is a remarkably common type of attack, and the dangers is poses are clear.

## Stored Cross-Site Scripting Attacks [demo](https://github.com/ngoctd314/learning/blob/master/security/owasp/xss/exploit_stored_xss.go)

Websites routinely generate and render HTML using information stored in a database. Retail websites will store product information in a database, and social media sites will store user conversations.

Any page content coming from the database is a potential attack vector for hackers. Attackers will attempt to inject JS code into the database so that the web server will write out the JS when it renders HTML. We call this type of attack a stored xss attack: the JS is written to the database, but executed in the browser when an unsuspecting victim views a particular page on the site.

Comment thread aren't the only place that can exhibit this type of vulnerability. Any user-controlled content is a potential avenue of attack that by injecting malicious script tags.

### Mitigation 1: Escape HTML characters

To prevent stored xss attacks, you need to escape all dynamic content coming from a datastore so that the browser knows to treat it as content of HTML tags, as opposed to raw HTML. Escaping content in the browser means replacing control characters in the HTML with their corresponding entity encoding.

| Character | Entity encoding |
| --------- | --------------- |
| "         | &quot;          |
| &         | &amp;           |
| '         | &apos;          |
| <         | &lt;            |
| >         | &gt;            |

All secure templating languages follow the same design principle: the templating engine implicitly escapes dynamic content unless the developer explicitly chooses to construct raw HTML. Make sure you understand how escaping works in your templates, and check that dynamic content is securely escaped during code reviews. In particular, if you have helper functions or methods that construct raw HTML for injection into templates, check to see that an attacker can's abuse their inputs to commit xss.

### Mitigation 2: Implement a Content security policy

Modern browsers allow websites to set a content security policy, which you can use to lock down JS execution on your site. Cross-site scripting attacks rely on an attacker being able to run malicious scripts on a victim's web page, usually by injecting <script> tags somewhere within the <html> tag of a page, also known as inline JavaScript.

By setting a content security policy in your HTTP response headers, you can tell the browser to never execute inline JavaScript. The browser will execute JS on your page only if it is imported via a src attribute in the <script> tag.

```html
<meta
  http-equiv="Content-Security-Policy"
  content="script-src 'self' https://apis.google.com"
/>
```

```txt
Content-Security-Policy: script-src 'self' https://apis.google.com
```

Inline script tags are considered bad practice in modern web development, so banning inline JavaScript actually forces your development team into good habits.

## Reflected Cross-Site Scripting Attacks [demo](https://github.com/ngoctd314/learning/blob/master/security/owasp/xss/exploit_stored_xss.go)

Rogue JavaScript in the database isn't the only vector for cross-site scripting attacks. If your site takes part of an HTTP request and displays it backs in a rendered web page, your rendering code needs to protect against attacks that inject malicious JS via the HTTP request. We call this type of attack a reflected cross-site scripting attack.

Virtually all websites display some part of HTTP requests in rendered HTML. Consider the Google search page: if you perform a search for "cats", Google passes the search term as part of the HTTP in the URL: https://www.google.com/search?q=cats. The search term cats displays in the search box above the search result.

Now, if Google were a less secure company, it'd be possible to replace the cats parameters in the URL with malicious JavaScript, and have that JavaScript code executed whenever anybody opens that URL in their browser. An attacker could email the URL as a link to a victim, or trick a user into visiting the URL by adding it to comment. This is the essence of reflected cross-site scripting attack: an attacker sends the malicious code in the HTML request, and then the server reflects it back.

If you want any chance of keeping your user safe, you need to protect against this attack vector.

### Mitigation: Escape Dynamic Content from HTTP Requests

You mitigate reflected XSS vulnerablity the same way you mitigate stored XSS vulnerabilities: by escaping control characters in dynamic content that the website interpolates into HTML pages.

Whether dynamic content comes from the backend database or the HTTP request, you need to escape it in the same way. 

Common target areas for stored XSS attacks are search pages and error pages. Make sure your team understands the risks and knows how to spot the vulnerability when reviewing code changes. Stored XSS attacks tend to be more harmful, because a single malicious piece of JS injected into your database table can attack your users over and over again. But reflected XSS are more common, since they're easier to implement. 

## DOM-Based Cross-Site Scripting Attacks [demo]()

Defusing most XSS attacks means inspecting and securing server-side code; however, the increasing popularity of rich frameworks for client-side code has led to rise of DOM-based XSS, whereby attackers smuggle malicious JS into a user's web page via URI fragment.

```txt
https://hacksplaining.com/glossary/url?ref=google&top=y#details
https: protocol
hacksplaining.com: domain
glossary/url: path
?ref=google&top=y: query
#detail: URI fragment
```

The URI fragment is the optional part of the URL after the #sign. Browsers use URI fragments for intra-page navigation - if an HTML tag on the page has an id attribute matching the URI fragment, the browser scrolls to that tag after opening the page. For instance, if you load the URL https://en.wikipedia.com/wiki/cat#grooming in a browser, the browser opens the web page and then scrolls to the Grooming section of the Wikipedia page about cats. It behaves this way because the heading tag for that section looks something like

```html
<h3 id="Grooming">Grooming</h3>
```

An HTML tag corresponding to the URI fragment #Grooming

Single-page apps also often use URL fragments to record and reload state in an intuitive fashion.

## Summary

In this chapter, you learned about cross-site scripting attacks, whereby an attacker injects JavaScript into the pages of your site when users view them. Attackers usually inject malicious JS into dynamic content that comes from a database, from the HTTP request, or from the URI fragment.

You can defeat cross-site scripting attacks by escaping any HTML control characters in dynamic content, and by setting a content security policy that prevents the execution of inline JavaScript.
