# Indexing strategies for high performance

Creating the correct indexes and using them properly is essential to good query performance.

There are many ways to choose and use indexes effectively, because there are many special-case optimizations and specialized behaviors. Determining what to use when and evaluating the performance implications of your choices are skills you'll learn over time.

## Isolating the Column

We commonly see queries that defeat indexes or prevent MySQL from using the available indexes. MySQL generally can't use indexes on columns unless the columns are isolated in the query. "Isolating" the column means it should not be part of an expression or be inside a function in the query.

For example, there's a query that can't use the index on actor_id

```sql
SELECT * FROM people WHERE CONCAT(last_name, '') = 'last_name-0-0';
+---------------+----------------+------------+--------+
| last_name     | first_name     | dob        | gender |
+---------------+----------------+------------+--------+
| last_name-0-0 | first_name-0-0 | 2012-09-01 | m      |
+---------------+----------------+------------+--------+
1 row in set
Time: 1.599s

SELECT * FROM people WHERE last_name = 'last_name-0-0';
+---------------+----------------+------------+--------+
| last_name     | first_name     | dob        | gender |
+---------------+----------------+------------+--------+
| last_name-0-0 | first_name-0-0 | 2012-09-01 | m      |
+---------------+----------------+------------+--------+
1 row in set
Time: 0.003s
```

```sql
SELECT actor_id FROM tbl WHERE actor_id + 1 = 5;
```

A human can easily see that the WHERE clause is equivalent to actor_id = 4, but MySQL can't solved the equation for actor_id. It's up to you to do this. It's up to you to do this. You should get in the habit of simplifying your `WHERE` criteria, so the indexed column is alone on one side of the comparison operator.

Here's another example of a common mistake

```sql
SELECT ... WHERE TO_DAYS(CURRENT_DATE) - TO_DAYS(date_col) <= 10;
```

## Prefix indexes and index selectivity

Sometimes you need to index very long character columns, which makes your indexes large and slow. One strategy is to simulate a hash index, as we showed earlier in this chapter. But sometimes that isn't good enough. What can you do?

You can often save space and get good performance by indexing the first few characters instead of the whole value. This makes your indexes use less space, but it also makes them less selective.  Index selectivity is the ratio of the number of distinct indexed values (the cardinality) to the total number of rows in the table (#T), and ranges from 1/#T to 1. A highly selective index is good because it lets MySQL filter out more rows when it looks for matches. A unique index has a selective of 1, which is as good as it gets.

A prefix of the column if often selective enough to give good performance. If you're indexing BLOB or TEXT columns, or very long VARCHAR columns, you must define prefix indexes, because MySQL disallows indexing their full length.

The trick is to choose a prefix that's long enough to give good selectivity, but short enough to save space. The prefix should be long enough to make the index nearly as useful as it would be if you'd indexed the whole column. In other words, you'd like the prefix's cardinality to be close to the full column's cardinality.

To determine a good prefix length, find the most frequent values and compare that list to a list of most frequent prefixes.

TODO: read more detail

## Multicolumn Indexes

Multicolumn indexes are often very poorly understood. Common mistakes are to index many or all of the columns separately, or to index columns in the wrong order.

We'll discuss column order in the next section. The first mistake, indexing many column separately, has a distinctive signature in SHOW CREATE TABLE:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t (
    c1 int,
    c2 int,
    c3 int,
    KEY(c1),
    KEY(c2),
    KEY(c3)
);
```

This strategy of indexing often results when people give vague but authoritative sounding advice such as "create indexes columns that appear in the WHERE clause." This advice is very wrong. It will result in one-star indexes at best. These indexes can be many orders of magnitude slower than truly optimal indexes. Sometimes when you can't design a three-star index, it's much better to ignore the WHERE clause and pay attention to optimal row order or create a covering index instead.

Individual indexes on lots of columns won't help MySQL improve performance for most queries. MySQL 5.0 and newer can cope a little with such poorly indexes tables by using a strategy known as index merge, which permits a query to make limited use of multiples indexes from a single table to locate desired rows. Eariler versions of MySQL could use only a single index, so when no single index was good enough to help, MySQL often chose a table scan. For example, the film_actor table has an index on film_id and an index on actor_id, but neither is a good choice for both WHERE conditions in this query:

```sql
SELECT film_id, actor_id FROM film_actor
WHERE actor_id = 1 OR film_id = 1;
```

In older MySQL versions, that query would produce a table scan unless you wrote it as the UNION of two queries:

```sql
SELECT film_id, actor_id FROM film_actor WHERE actor_id = 1
UNION ALL
SELECT film_id, actor_id FROM film_actor WHERE film_id = 1
AND actor_id <> 1;
```

In MySQL 5.0 and newer, however, the query can use both indexes, scanning them simultaneously and merging the results. There are three variations on the algorithm: union for OR conditions, intersection for AND conditions, and unions of intersections for combinations of the two. 

```sql
CREATE TABLE film_actor (
    film_id int not null AUTO_INCREMENT,
    actor_id int,
    PRIMARY(film_id),
    KEY idx_actor_id (actor_id)
);
```

```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT film_id, actor_id FROM film_actor WHERE film_id = 1 OR actor_id = 1;
+----+-------------+------------+------------+-------+----------------------+--------------+---------+--------+------+----------+--------------------------+
| id | select_type | table      | partitions | type  | possible_keys        | key          | key_len | ref    | rows | filtered | Extra                    |
+----+-------------+------------+------------+-------+----------------------+--------------+---------+--------+------+----------+--------------------------+
| 1  | SIMPLE      | film_actor | <null>     | index | PRIMARY,idx_actor_id | idx_actor_id | 5       | <null> | 5    | 36.0     | Using where; Using index |
+----+-------------+------------+------------+-------+----------------------+--------------+---------+--------+------+----------+--------------------------+
```

The index merge strategy sometimes works very well, but it's more common for it to actually be an indication of a poorly indexed table:

- When the server intersects indexes (usually for AND conditions), it usually means that you need a single index with all the relevant columns, not multiple indexes that have to be combined.
- When the server unions indexes (usually for OR conditions), sometimes the algorithm's buffering, sorting, and merging operations use lots of CPU and memory resources. This is especially true if not all the indexes are very selective, so the scans return lots of rows to the merge operation.
- Recall that the optimizer doesn't account for this cost - it optimizes just the number of random page reads. This can make it "underprice" the query, which might in fact run more slowly than a plain table scan. The intensive memory and CPU usage also tends to impact concurrent queries, but you won't see this effect when you run the query in isolation. Sometimes rewriting such queries with a UNION, the way you used to have to do in MySQL and earlier, is more optimal.

When you see an index merge is EXPLAIN, you should examine the query and table structure to see if this really the best you can get. You can disable index merges with the optimizer_switch option or variable. You can also use IGNORE INDEX.

## Choosing a Good Column Order

One of the most common causes of confusion we've seen is the order of columns in an index. The correct depends on the queries that will use the index, and you must think about how to choose the index orde such that rows are sorted and grouped in a way that will benefit the query. (This section applies to B-Tree indexes, by the way; hash and other index types don't store their data in sorted order as B-Tree indexes do).

The order of columns in a multicolumn B-Tree index means that the index is sorted first by the leftmost column, then by the next column, and so on. Therefore, the index can be scanned in either forward or reverse order, to satisfy queries with ORDER BY, GROUP BY, and DISTINCT clauses that match the column order exactly.

As a result, the column order is vitally important in multicolumn indexes. The column order either enables or prevents the index from earning "stars" in Lahdenmaki and Leach's three-star system. We will show many examples of how this works through the rest of this chapter.

There is an old rule of thumb for choosing column order: place the most selective columns first in the index. How useful is this suggestion? It can be helpful in some cases, but it's usually much less important than avoiding random I/O and sorting, all things considered. (Specific cases vary, so there's no one-size-fits-all rule. That alone should tell you that this rule of thumb is probably less important than you think).

Placing the most selective columns first can be a good idea when there is no sorting or grouping to consider, and thus purpose of the index is only to optimize `WHERE` lookups. In such cases, it might indeed work well to design the index so that it filters out rows as quickly as possible, so it's more selective for queries that specify only a prefix of the index in the WHERE clause. However, this depends not only on the selectivity (overall cardinality) of the columns, but also on the actual values you use to look up rows - the distribution of values. This is the same type of consideration we explored for  choosing a good prefix length. You might actually need to choose the column order such that it's as selective as possible for the queries that you'll run most.

Let's use the following query as an example:

```go
type Data struct {
	StaffID    int `db:"staff_id"`
	CustomerID int `db:"customer_id"`
}

func seed() {
	var in [][]Data
	for i := 0; i < 1000; i++ {
		var tmp []Data
		for j := 0; j < 1000; j++ {
			tmp = append(tmp, Data{
				StaffID:    rand.Intn(1000),
				CustomerID: rand.Intn(10000),
			})
		}
		in = append(in, tmp)
	}

	for _, v := range in {
		_, err := mysqlConn.NamedExec("INSERT INTO payment (staff_id, customer_id) VALUES (:staff_id, :customer_id) ", v)
		if err != nil {
			log.Println(err)
		}
	}
}
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM payment WHERE staff_id = 2 AND customer_id = 584;
```

Should you create an index on (staff_id, customer_id), or should you reverse the column order? We can run some quick queries to help examine the distribution of values in the table and determine which column has a higher selectivity. Let's transform the query to count the cardinality of each predicate in the `WHERE` clause:

```sql
SELECT SUM(staff_id=2), SUM(customer_id=584) from payment;

sum(staff_id=2)      | 1019
sum(customer_id=584) | 94
1 row in set
```

According to the rule of thumb, we should place customer_id first in the index, because the predicate matches fewer rows in the table. We can then run the query again to see how selective staff_id is within the range of rows selected by this specific customer ID:

```sql
SELECT SUM(staff_id = 2) FROM payment WHERE customer_id = 584\G

SUM(staff_id = 2): 17
```

Be careful with this technique, because the results depend on the specific constants supplied for the chosen query. If you optimize your indexes for this query and other queries don't fare as well, the server's performance might suffer overall, or some queries might run unpredictably.

If you're using the "worst" sample query from a report from a tool such as pt-query digest, this technique can be effective way to see what might be the most helpful indexes for your queries and your data. But if you don't have specific samples to run, it might be better to use the old rule of thumb, which is look at the cardinality across the board, not just for one query:

```sql
SELECT 
    COUNT(DISTINCT staff_id) / COUNT(*) AS staff_id_selectivity,
    COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) / COUNT(*) AS customer_id_selectivity,
    COUNT(*)
FROM payment\G
```

```txt
*************************** 1. row ***************************
staff_id_selectivity: 0.0001
customer_id_selectivity: 0.0373
COUNT(*): 16049
```

customer_id has higher selective, so again the answer is to put that column first in the index:

```sql
ALTER TABLE payment ADD KEY(customer_id, staff_id);
```

The moral of this little story is that rules of thumb and heuristics can be useful, but you have to careful not to assume that average-case performance is representation of special-case performance. Special cases can wreck performance for the whole application.

In the end, although the rule of thumb about selectivity and cardinality is interesting to explorer, other factors - such as sorting, grouping, and the presence of range conditions in the query's `WHERE` clause - can make a much bigger difference to query performance. 

## Clustered Indexes

Clustered indexes aren't a separate type of index. Rather, they're an approach to data storage. The exact details vary between implementations, but InnoDB's clustered indexes actually store a B-Tree index and the rows together in the same structure.

When a table has a clustered index, its rows are actually stored in the index's leaf pages.

## Covering Indexes

A common suggestion is to create indexes for the query's WHERE clause, but that's only part of the story. Indexes need to be designed for the whole query, not just the `WHERE` clause. Indexes are indeed a way to find rows effectively, but MySQL can also use an index to retrieve a column's data, so it doesn't have to read the row at all. After all, the index's leaf nodes contain the values they index; why read the row when reading the index can give you the data you want? An index that contains (or "covers") all the data needed to satisfy a query is called a covering index.

Covering indexes can be a very powerful tool and can dramatically improve performance. Consider the benefits of reading only the index instead of the data:

- Index entries are usually smaller than the full row size, so MySQL can access significantly less data if it reads only the index. This is very important for cached workloads, where much of the response time comes from copying the data. It is also helpful for I/O bound workloads, because the indexes are smaller than the data and fit in memory better. (This is especially true for MyISAM, which can pack indexes to make them even smaller).
- Indexes are sorted by their index values (at least within the page), so I/O bound range access will need to do less I/O compared to fetching each row from a random disk location. For some storage engines, such as MyISAM and Percona XtraDB, you can even OPTIMIZE the table to get fully sorted indexes, which will let simple range queries use completely sequential index accesses.
- Some storage engines, such as MyISAM cache only the index in MySQL's memory. Because the operating system caches the data for MyISAM, accessing it typically requries a system call. This might cause a huge performance impact, especially for cached workloads where the system call is the most expensive part of data access.
- Covering indexes are especially helpful for InnoDB tables, because of InnoDBs's clustered indexes. InnoDB's secondary indexes hold the row's primary key values at their leaf nodes. Thus a secondary index that covers a query avoids another index lookup in the primary key.

In all of these scenarios, it is typically much less expensive to satisfy a query from an index instead of looking up the rows.

A covering index can't be just any kind of index. This index must store the values from the columns it contains. Hash, spatial, and full-text indexes don't store these values, so MySQL can use only B-Tree indexes to cover queries. And again, different storage engines implement covering indexes differently, and not all storage engines support them.

When you issue a query that is covered by an index, you'll see "Using index" in the Extra column in EXPLAIN. For example, inventory table has a multicolumn index on (store_id, film_id). MySQL can use this index for a query that accesses only those two columns:

```sql
  EXPLAIN SELECT store_id, film_id FROM inventory WHERE store_id = 10 AND film_id = 2599;
+----+-------------+-----------+------------+------+---------------+----------+---------+-------------+------+----------+-------------+
| id | select_type | table     | partitions | type | possible_keys | key      | key_len | ref         | rows | filtered | Extra       |
+----+-------------+-----------+------------+------+---------------+----------+---------+-------------+------+----------+-------------+
| 1  | SIMPLE      | inventory | <null>     | ref  | store_id      | store_id | 10      | const,const | 1    | 100.0    | Using index |
+----+-------------+-----------+------------+------+---------------+----------+---------+-------------+------+----------+-------------+
1 row in set
Time: 0.004s
```

Index-covered queries have subtleties that can disable this optimization. The MySQL query optimizer decides before executing a query whether an index covers it. Suppose the index covers a `WHERE` condition, but not the entire query.
