# Think About Data Systems 

We typically think of databases, queues, caches, etc. as being very different categories of tools. But all of them as data system. There are datastores that are also used as message ques (Redis), and there are message queues with database-like durability guarantees (Kafka).

The focus on three concerns that are important in most software systems:

**Reliability**

The system should continue to work correctly (performing the correct function at the desired level of performance) even in the face of adversity (hardware or software faults, and even human error).

**Scalability**
As the system grows (in data volume, traffic volume, or complexity), there should be reasonable ways of dealing with that growth.

**Maintainability**
Overtime, many different people will work on the system (engineering and operations, both maintaining current behavior and adapting the system to new use cases), and they should all be able to work on it productively.

## Reliability

Everybody has an intuitive idea of what it means for something to be reliable or unreliable.

- The application performs the function that the user expected.
- It can tolerate the user making mistakes or using the software in unexpected ways.
- Its performance is good enough for the required use case, under the expected load and data volume.
- The system prevents any unauthorized access and abuse.

If all those things together mean "working correctly", then we can understand reliability as meaning, roughly "continuing to work correctly, even when things go wrong".

The things that can go wrong can called faults, and systems that anticipate faults and can cope with them are called fault-tolerant or resilient.

Note that a fault is not the same as a failure. A fault is usually defined as one component of the system deviating from its spec, whereas a failure is when the system as a whole stops providing the required service to the user. It is impossible to reduce the probability of a fault to zero; therefore it is usually best to design fault-tolerance mechanisms that prevent faults from causing failures.

Although we generally prefer tolerating faults over preventing faults, there are cases where prevention is better than cure (because no cure exists).

### Hardware Faults

### Software Errors

### How Important is Reliability?