# Dependency Injection by Config

Config injection is not a completely different method but an extension of both constructor injection and method injection. It intends to address potential issues with those methods, such as excessive or repeated injected dependencies, without sacrificing the UX of our code.

- Config injection
- Advantages of config injection
- Applying config injection
- Disadvantages of config injection

## Config injection

Config injection is a specific implementation of method and parameter injection.

```go
func NewLongConstructor(logger Logger, stats Instrumentation, limiter RateLimiter, cache Cache, timeout time.Duration, workers int) *MyStruct {
    return &MyStruct{}
}
```

By applying config injection, our example becomes the following:

```go
func NewByConfigConstructor(cfg MyConfig, limiter RateLimiter, cache Cache) *MyStruct {
    return &MyStruct{}
}
```

We have merged the common concerns and the configuration together into the config definition but left the significant parameters intact.

Config injection takes this approach to avoid the service locator's God object and inherent coupling between usage and the God object.

## Advantages of config injection

**It's excellent for decoupling from a config package**

When we have a config package that loads from a single place, such as a file, then this package tends to become a dependency for many of the other packages in the system. When considering the SRP, we recognize that the more users a package or object has, the more resistant and/or difficult it is to change.

With config injection, we are also defining our requirements in a local interface and leveraging Go's implicit interfaces and the DIP to keep the packages decoupled.

```go
func TestInjectedConfig(t *testing.T) {
    // load test config
    cfg, err := config.LoadFromFile(testConfigLocation)
    require.NoError(t, err)

    // build and use object
    obj := NewMyObject(cfg)
    result, resultErr := obj.Do()

    // validate
    assert.NotNil(t, result)
    assert.NoError(t, resultErr)
}

func TestConfigInjection(t *testing.T) {
    // build test config (stub or mock)
    cfg := &TestConfig{}

    // build and use object
    obj := NewMyObject(cfg)
    result, resultErr := obj.Do()

    // validate
    assert.NotNil(t, result)
    assert.NoError(t, resultErr)
}
```

Yes, the amount of code is greater. However, we no longer have to manage test configuration files, which can often be a pain. Our tests are entirely self-contained and should have no concurrency problems, as they might with a global config object.

**It eases the burden of injecting common concerns**

In the previous example, we are using config injection to inject the logging and instrumentation objects. Common concerns such as this are an excellent use for config injection as they are frequently needed but are not informative regarding the purpose of the function ifself. Due to their shared nature, another approach would be to turn them into global singletons instead of injecting them. Personally, I prefer to inject them as this gives me the opportunity to validate their usage.

**It improves usability by reducing parameters**

**Dependency creation can be deferred until use**

Have you ever tried to inject a dependency, only to find that it didn't exist or wasn't ready yet? Have you ever had a dependency that was no expensive to start or run that you wanted to create it only when it was absolutely necessary? With config injection, dependency creation, and access only need to be resolved at the point of usage and not during injection.

## Applying config injection

## Disadvantages of config injection

As we have seen, config injection can be used with both constructors and functions. Is possible to build a system with only config injection. Unfortunately, config injection does have some disadvantages.

**Passing config instead of abstract dependencies leaks implementation details**
