# Git basics

## 2.2. Recording changes to the Repository

Each file in your working directory can be in one of two states: **tracked** or **untracked**. Tracked files are files that were in the last snapshot, as well as any newly staged files; they can be unmodified, modified, or staged. In short, tracked files are files that Git knows about.

Untracked files are everything else - any files in your working directory that were not in your last snapshot and are in your staging area. When you first clone a repository, all of your files will be tracked and unmodified because Git just checked them out and you haven't edited anything.

As you edit files, Git sees them as modified, because you've changed them since your last commit. As you work, you selectively stage these modified files and then commit all changes, and the cycle repeats.

**Checking the Status of your files**

The main tool you use to determine which files are in which state is the git status command.

Untracked file basically means that Git sees a file you didn't have in the previous snapshot (commit), and which hasn't yet been staged.

**Tracking new Files**

In order to begin tracking a new file, you use the command git add. To begin tracking the file

```bash
git add README
```

**Staging Modified Files**

**Short Status**

```bash
git status -s
```

New files that aren't tracked have a ?? next to them, new files that have been added to the staging area have A, modified files have an M and so on. There are two columns to the output - the left-hand column indicates the status of the staging area and the right-hand column indicates the status of the working tree.


**Viewing your staged and unstaged changes**

git status is too vague, you want to known exactly what you changed, not just which files were changed, you can use git diff command.

**Commiting your changes**

You've created your first commit! You can see that the commit has given some output about itself: which branch you commited to (master), what SHA-1 checksum the commit has (4324fa), how many files were changed, and statistics about lines added adn removed in the commit.

Remember that the commit records the snapshot you set up in your staging area. Anything you didn't stage is still sitting there modified; you can do another commit to add it to your history. Every time you perform a commit, you're recording a snapshot of your project that you can revert to or compare to later.

**Skipping the Staging Area**
