# Data types

MySQL support SQL data types in several categories: numeric types, data and time types, string (character and byte) types, spatial types, and the JSON data type.

## Numeric Data Types

### Numeric Data Type Syntax

For integer data types, M indicates the minimum display width. The maximum display width is 255. Display width is unrelated to the range of values a type can store.

For floating-point and fixed-point data types, M is the total number of digits that can be stored.

Numeric data types that permit the UNSIGNED attribute also permit SIGNED. However, these data types are SIGNED by default, so the SIGNED attribute has no effect. 

SERIAL is an alias for BIGINT UNSIGNED NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT UNIQUE

**Warning**

When you use substraction between integer values where one is of type UNSIGNED, the result is unsigned unless the NO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTION SQL mode is enabled.

- TINYINT[(M)] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

1 bytes.

- BOOL, BOOLEAN

synonyms for TINYINT(1).

```sql
SELECT IF (True=1, 'true', 'false');

+------------------------------+
| IF (True=1, 'true', 'false') |
+------------------------------+
| true                         |
+------------------------------+

SELECT IF (True=2, 'true', 'false');
+------------------------------+
| IF (True=2, 'true', 'false') |
+------------------------------+
| false                        |
+------------------------------+
```

- SMALLINT([M]) [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

2 bytes

- MEDIUMINT([M]) [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

3 bytes

- INT([M]) [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

4 bytes

- BIGINT([M]) [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

8 bytes

- DECIMAL[(M[, D])] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

- FLOAT(M, D)

- DOUBLE[(M, D)] [UNSIGNED] [ZEROFILL]

### Fixed-Point Types (Exact Value) - DECIMAL, NUMERIC

The DECIMAL and NUMERIC types store exact number data values. These types are used when it is important to preserve exact precision, for example with monetary data. In MySQL, NUMERIC is implemented as DECIMAL, so the following remarks about DECIMAL apply equally to NUMERIC.

Standard SQL requires that DECIMAL(5, 2) be able to store any value with five digits and two decimals, so values can be stored in the salary column range from -999.99 to 999.99

The syntax DECIMAL(M) is equivalent to DECIMAL(M, 0). Similar, the syntax DECIMAL is equivalent to DECIMAL(M, 0) where the implementation is permitted to decide the value of M. MySQL supports both of these variant forms of DECIMAL syntax. The default value of M is 10.

If the scale is 0, DECIMAL values contain no decimal point or fraction part.

### Floating-Point Types (Approximate Value) - FLOAT, DOUBLE

The FLOAT and DOUBLE types represent approximate numeric data values. MySQL uses four bytes for single-precision values and eight bytes for double-precision values. 

### Bit-Value Type - BIT

### Numeric Type Attributes

MySQL supports an extension for optionally specifying the display width of integer data types in parentheses. For example, INT(4) specifies an INT with a display width of four digits.

All integer types can have an optional (nonstandard) UNSIGNED attribute.

Floating-point and fixed-point types also can be UNSIGNED. As with integer types, this attribute prevents negative values from being stored in the column. Unlike the integer types, the upper range of column values remains the same.

Integer or floating-point data types can have the AUTO_INCREMENT attribute. When you insert a value of NULL into an indexed AUTO_INCREMENT column, the column is set to the next sequence value. Typically this is value + 1, where value is the largest value for the column currently in the table. (AUTO_INCREMENT sequences begin with 1).

Storing 0 into AUTO_INCREMENT column has the same effect as storing NULL, unless the NO_AUTO_VALUE_ON_ZERO mode is enabled.

```sql
CREATE TABLE int_auto_inc (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY
);

INSERT INTO int_auto_inc (id) VALUES (0);

SELECT * FROM int_auto_inc;
+----+
| id |
+----+
| 1  |
+----+
```

Integer or floating-point data types can have the AUTO_INCREMENT attribute. When you insert a value of NULL into an indexed AUTO_INCREMENT column, the column is set to the next sequence value. Typically this is value+1, where value is the largest value for the column currently in the table. (AUTO_INCREMENT sequences begin with 1).

Storing 0 into an AUTO_INCREMENT column has the same effect as storing NULL, unless the NO_AUTO_VALUE_ON_ZERO SQL mode is enabled.

CHECK constraints cannot refer to columns that have the AUTO_INCREMENT attribute, nor can the AUTO_INCREMENT attribute be added to existing columns that are used in CHECK constraints.

### Out-of-Range and Overflow Handling

When MySQL stores a value in a numeric column that is outside the permissible range of the column data type, the result depends on the SQL mode in effect at the time.

- If strict SQL mode is enabled, MySQL rejects the out-of-range value with an error, and the insert fails, in accordance with SQL standard.
- If no restrictive modes are enabled, MySQL clips the value to the appropriate endpoint of the column data type range and stores the resulting value instead.

When an out-of-range value is assigned to an integer column, MySQL stores the value representing the corresponding endpoint of the column data type range.

```sql
SET sql_mode = 'TRADITIONAL';
INSERT INTO int_auto_inc (id) VALUES (2147483648);

(1264, "Out of range value for column 'id' at row 1")
```

```sql
SET sql_mode = '';
INSERT INTO int_auto_inc (id) VALUES (2147483648);

SHOW WARNINGS;
+---------+------+---------------------------------------------+
| Level   | Code | Message                                     |
+---------+------+---------------------------------------------+
| Warning | 1264 | Out of range value for column 'id' at row 1 |
+---------+------+---------------------------------------------+

SELECT * FROM int_auto_inc;
+------------+--------+
| id         | name   |
+------------+--------+
| 2147483647 | <null> |
+------------+--------+
```

When strict SQL mode is not enabled, column-assignment conversions that occur due to clipping are reported as warnings for ALTER TABLE, LOAD DATA, UPDATE, and multiple-row INSERT statements. In strict mode, these statement fail, and some or all the values are not inserted or changed, depending on whether the table is a transactional table and other factors.


```sql
SELECT CAST(9223372036854775807 AS UNSIGNED) + 1;
+-------------------------------------------+
| CAST(9223372036854775807 AS UNSIGNED) + 1 |
+-------------------------------------------+
| 9223372036854775808                       |
+-------------------------------------------+
```

```sql
SHOW VARIABLES LIKE 'sql_mode';
+---------------+-------+
| Variable_name | Value |
+---------------+-------+
| sql_mode      |       |
+---------------+-------+

SELECT CAST(0 as unsigned) - 1;
(1690, "BIGINT UNSIGNED value is out of range in '(cast(0 as unsigned) - 1)'")

SET sql_mode = 'NO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTION';
SELECT CAST(0 as unsigned) - 1;
+-------------------------+
| cast(0 as unsigned) - 1 |
+-------------------------+
| -1                      |
+-------------------------+
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM Int_auto_inc;
+------------+--------+
| id         | name   |
+------------+--------+
| 1          | <null> |
| 2147483647 | <null> |
+------------+--------+

SET sql_mode = '';

SELECT id - 10 FROM int_auto_inc;
(1690, "BIGINT UNSIGNED value is out of range in '(`learn`.`int_auto_inc`.`id` - 10)'")
```

## Date and Time Data Types

## String Data Types



