# Schema Design Gotchas in MySQL

Although there are universally bad and good design principles, there are also issues that arise from how MySQL is implemented, and that means you can make MySQL specific mistakes.

**Too many columns**

If you're planning for hundredes of columns, be aware that the server's performance characteristics will be a bit different.

**Too many joins**

MySQL has a limitation of 61 tables per join. Even at many fewer joins than 61, however, the cost of planning and optimizing the query can become problematic for MySQL.

**The all-powerful ENUM**

Beware of overusing ENUM. Here's an example we saw:

```sql
CREATE TABLE tbl (
    country ENUM('', '0', '1', ..., '31')
)
```

The schema was sprinkled liberally with this pattern. This would probably be a questionable design decision in any database with an enumerated value type, because it really should be an integer that is foreign-keyed to a "dictionary" or "lookup" table anyway. In MySQL you can't add a new country to the list without an ALTER TABLE, which is a blocking operation in MySQL 5.0 and earlier and even in 5.1 and newer if you add the value anywhere but at the end of the list.

**The ENUM is disguise**

An ENUM permits the column to hold one value from set of defined values. A SET permits the column hold one or more values from a set of defined values. Sometimes these can be easy to confuse.

```sql
CREATE TABLE tbl (
    is_default_set('Y', 'N') NOT NULL default 'N'
)
```

That almost surely ought to be an ENUM instead of a SET, assuming that it can't be both true and false at the same time.

**NULL not invented here**

Avoiding NULL, and indeed we suggest considering alternatives when possible. Even when you do need to store a "no value" fact in a table, you might not need to use NULL. Perhaps you can use zero, a special value, or an empty string instead.

However, you can take this to extremes. Don't be too afraid of using NULL when you need to represent an unknown value. In some cases, it's better to use NULL than a magical constant. Selecting one value from the domain of a constrained type, such as using -1 to represent an unknown integer, can complicate your code a lot, introduce bugs, and just generally make a total mess out of things. Handling NULL isn't always easy, but it's often better than the alternatives.
