# Speeding Up ALTER TABLE

MySQL's ALTER TABLE performance can become a problem with very large tables. Many people have experience with ALTER TABLE operations that have taken hours or days to complete.

For the general case, you need to use either operational tricks such as swapping servers around and performing the ALTER on servers that are not in production service, or a "shadow copy" approach. The technique for a shadow copy is to build a new table with the desired structure beside the existing one, and then perform a rename and drop to swap the two, you can perform non-blocking schema changes with its CDC utility too.

Not all ALTER TABLE operations cause table rebuilds. For example, you can change or drop a column's default value in two ways (one fast, and one slow). Say you want ot change a film's default rental duration from three to five days. Here's the expensive way:

```sql
ALTER TABLE tbl
MODIFY COLUMN col TINYINT(3) NOT NULL DEFAULT 5;
```

SHOW STATUS shows that this statement does 1000 handler reads and 1000 inserts. In other words, it copies the table to a new table, even though the column's type, size and nullability haven't changed.

In theory, MySQL could have skipped building a new table. The default value for the column is actually stored in the table's .frm file, so you should be able to change it without touching the table itself. MySQL doesn't yet use this optimization, however; and MODIFY COLUMN will cause a table rebuild.

You can change a column's default with ALTER COLUMN though:

```sql
ALTER TABLE tbl
ALTER COLUMN col SET DEFAULT 5;
```
This statement modifies the .frm file and leaves the table alone. As a result, it is very fast.

**Modifying Only the .frm file**

**Building MyISAM Indexes Quickly**