# Use of Index Extensions

InnoDB automatically extends each secondary index by appending the primary key columns to it. Consider this table definition:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
    i1 INT NOT NULL DEFAULT 0,
    i2 INT NOT NULL DEFAULT 0,
    d DATE DEFAULT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (i1, i2),
    INDEX k_d (d)
) ENGINE = InnoDB;
```

This table defines the primary key on columns (i1, i2). It also defines a secondary index k_d on column (d), but internally InnoDB extends this index and treats it as columns (d, i1, i2).

The optimizer takes into account the primary key columns of the extended secondary index when determining how and whether to use that index when determining how and whether to use that index. This can result in more efficient query execution plans and better performance.

The optimizer can use extended secondary indexes for ref, range, and index_merge index access, for Loose Index Scan access, for join and sorting optimization, and for MIN()/MAX() optimization.

Now consider this query:

```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT COUNT(*) FROM t1 WHERE i1 = 3 AND d = '2000-01-01';
```

The execution plan depends on whether the extended index is used:

When the optimizer does not consider index extensions, it treats the index k_d as only (d). EXPLAIN for the query produces this result:

```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT COUNT(*) FROM t1 WHERE i1 = 3 AND d = '2000-01-01'\G
```

```txt
*************************** 1. row ***************************
           id: 1
  select_type: SIMPLE
        table: t1
         type: ref
possible_keys: PRIMARY,k_d
          key: k_d
      key_len: 4
          ref: const
         rows: 5
        Extra: Using where; Using index
```

When the opitimizer takes index extensions into account, it treats k_d as (d, i1, i2). In this case, it can use the leftmost index prefix (d, i1) to produce a better execution plan:

```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT COUNT(*) FROM t1 WHERE i1 = 3 AND d = '2000-01-01'\G
```

```txt
*************************** 1. row ***************************
           id: 1
  select_type: SIMPLE
        table: t1
         type: ref
possible_keys: PRIMARY,k_d
          key: k_d
      key_len: 8
          ref: const,const
         rows: 1
        Extra: Using index
```

The use_index_extensions flag of the optimizer_switch system variable permits control over whether the optimizer takes the primary key columns into account when determining how to use an InnoDB table's secondary indexes. By default, use_index_extensions is enabled. To check whether disabling use of index extensions improves performance, use this statement:

```sql
SET optimizer_switch = 'use_index_extensions=off';
```
