# Never Stop Aiming for Better

Do you want code that is easier to maintain? How about easier to test? Easier to extend? Dependency Injection (DI) might be just the tool you need.

## How do I define DI?

DI is coding in such way that those resources (that is functions or structs) that we depend on are abstractions. Because the dependencies are abstract, changes to them do not necessitate changes to our code. The fancy word for this is decoupling.

Go has interfaces and function closure.

```go
type Saver interface {
	Save(data []byte) error
}

func SavePerson(person *Person, saver Saver) error {
	// validate input
	err := person.validate()
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	// encode person to bytes
	bytes, err := person.encode()
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	// save the person and return the result
	return saver.Save(bytes)
}

type Person struct {
	Name  string
	Phone string
}

func (p *Person) validate() error {
	if p.Name == "" {
		return errors.New("name missing")
	}
	if p.Phone == "" {
		return errors.New("phone missing")
	}

	return nil
}
func (p *Person) encode() ([]byte, error) {
	return json.Marshal(p)
}
```

What does Saver do? It saves some bytes somewhere. How does it do this? We dont know and, while working on the SavePerson function, we don't care.

Let's look at another example that uses a function literal:

```go
func LoadPerson(ID int, decodePerson func(data []byte) *Person) (*Person, error) {
	// validate the input
	if ID <= 0 {
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("invalid ID '%d' supplied", ID)
	}

	// load from storage
	bytes, err := loadPerson(ID)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	// decode bytes and return

	return decodePerson(bytes), nil
}
func loadPerson(ID int) ([]byte, error) {
	return nil, errors.New("not implementd")
}
```

What does the decodePerson do? It converts the bytes into a person. How? We don't need to know right now.

This is the first advantage of DI that I would highlight to you:

**DI reduces the knowledge required when working on piece of code, by expressing dependencies in an abstract or generic manner**

Let's say that the preceding code came from a system that store data in a Network File Share (NFS). How would we write unit test for that? Having access to NFS at all times would be a pain.
On the other hand, by relying on an abstract, we could swap out the code that saves to the NFS with fake code. This way, we are only testing our code in isolation from the NFS

```go
func TestSavePerson_happyPath(t *testing.T) {
    // input
    in := &person{}

    // mock the nfs
    mockNFS := &mockSaver{}
    mockNFS.On("save", mock.Anything).Return(nil).Once()

    // call save
    resultErr := SavePerson(in, mockNFS)
}
```

Which brings us to the second advantage of DI

**DI enables us to test our code in isolation of our dependencies**

**DI enables us to quickly and reliably test situations that are otherwise difficult or impossible**

Tomorrow, if we decided to save to a NoSQL database instead of our NFS, how would our SavePerson code have to change? Not one bit. We would only need to write a new Saver implementation, giving us the fourth advantage of DI:

**DI reduces the impact of extensions or changes**
At the end of the day, DI is a tool - a handly tool, but no magic bullet. It's a tool that can make code easier to understand, test, extend and reuse.

## Code smells that indicate you might need DI

Code smells generally fall into four different categories:
- Code bloat
- Resistance to change
- Wasted effort
- Tight coupling

## Code bloat

Code bloat smells are cases where unwieldy slabs of code have been added to structs of functions so that they have become hard to understand, maintain and test. Frequently found in older code, they are often the result of a gradual degradation and lack of maintenance rather than intentional choices.

These smells include the following:

- **Long methods:** While the code is run on computers, it is written for humans. Any method of more than about 30 lines should be split into smaller chunks. While it makes no different to the computer, it makes it easier for us humans to understand.
- **Long structs:** Similar to long methods, the longer a struct, the harder it is to understand and therefore maintain. Long structs typically also indicate the struct is doing too much. Splitting one struct into several smaller ones is also a great way to increase the reusability potential of the code.
- **Long parameter lists:** Long parameter lists also indicate that the method is like ly doing more than it should. When adding new features, it is tempting to add a new parameter to an existing function to account for the new use case. This new parameter is either optional/unnecessary for the existing use cases or is an indication of a significant increase in complexity in the method.
- **Long conditional blocks**

Applying DI to these smells will typically reduce the complexity of individual pieces of code by breaking them into smaller, separate pieces, which in turn makes them easier to understand, maintain and test.

## Resistance to change

These are cases where it is difficult and/or slow to add new features. Similarly, tests are often harder to write, especially tests for failure conditions. Similar to code bloat, these smells can be result of a gradual degradation and lack of maintenance, but they can also be caused by a lack of up-front planning or poor API design.

These smells include the following

- Shotgun surgery: This is when small changes made to one struct necessitate changes in other structs. These changes imply that the organisation or abstraction used was incorrect. Typically, all of these changes should be in one class. In the following example, you can see how adding an email field to the person data would result in changing all three structs (Presenter, Validator and Saver)

```go
// Renderer will render a person to the supplied writer
type Rendered struct{}
func (r Rendered) render(name, phone string, output io.Writer) {}

// Validator will validate the supplied person has all the required fields
type Validator struct{}
func (r Validator) validate(name, phone string) error {}

// Saver will save the supplied person to the DB
type Saver struct{}
func (s Saver) Save(db *sql.DB, name, phone string) {} 
```

- Leaking implementation details: One of the more popular idioms in the Go community is accept interfaces, return structs. When a function accepts a struct, it ties the user to a particular implementation - a strict relationship that makes future changes or additional usage difficult. By extension, if that implementation detail were to change, the API changes and forces changes on its users.

Applying DI to these smells is typically a good investment in the future. While not fixing them is not fatal, the code will progressively degrade until you are dealing with the proverbial big ball of mud. You know the type - a package that no-one understands, no-one trusts, and only the brave or stupid are willing to make changes to. DI enables you to decouple from the implementation choices, thereby making it easier to refactor, test, and maintain small chunks of code in isolation.

## Wasted effort

These smells are cases where the cost to maintain the code is higher than it needs to be. There are typically caused by laziness or lack of experience. It's always easier to copy/paste code than to carefully refactor it. If feels great in the moment, but the long-term consequences suck.

These smells include the following:

- Excessive duplicated code: While in most cases, duplicated code is a bad thing, sometimes copying code can result in a system that is easier to maintain and can evolve.
- Excessive comments
- Overly complicated code
- DRY/WET code: The Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY) principle is aimed at reducing duplicated efforts by grouping responsibilities together and providing clean abstractions. By contrast, in WET code, sometimes called Waste Everyone's Time code, you will find the same responsibility in many places.

While many of these smells can be fixed without Di, DI provides an easier way to lift and shift the duplication into an abstraction that can then be used to reduce the duplication and improve the readability and maintainability of the code.

## Tight coupling

For people, tight coupling might be a good thing. For Go code, it's really not. Coupling is a measure of how objects relate to or depend on each other. When the tight coupling is present, this interdependence forces the objects or packages to evolve together, adding complexity and maintenance costs.

Coupling-related smells are perhaps the most insidious and obstinate but by far the most rewarding when dealt with. They are often the result of a lack of object-oriented design or insufficient use of interfaces.

Frequently, I find it useful to implement a feature in a tightly coupled form first and then work backward to decouple and thoroughly unit test my code before submitting it. For me, it is especially helpful in cases where the correct abstractions are not obvious.

These smells include the following

**- Dependence on God objects:** These are large objects that know too much or do too much. While this is a general code smell and something that should be avoided like the the plague, the problem from a DI perspective is that too much of the code is dependent on this one object. When they exist and we are not careful, it won't be long before Go will be refusing to compile due to a circular dependency.

**- Circular dependencies:** These are where package A depends on package B, and package B depends on packge A. This is an easy mistake to make and somtimes a hard one to get rid of.

**Object orgy:** These occur when an object has too much knowledge of and/or access to the internals of another or, to put in another way; insufficient encapsulation between objects. Because the objects are joined at the hip, they will frequently have to evolve together, increasing the cost of understanding the code and maintaining it.

```go
func (o *PageLoader) LoadPage(url string) ([]byte, error) {
    b := newFetcher()

    // check cache
    payload, err := b.cache.Get(url)
    if err == nil {
        // found in cache
        return payload, nil
    }

    // call upstream
    resp, err := b.httpClient.Get(url)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }
    defer resp.Body.Close()

    // extract data from HTTP response
    payload, err = ioutil.ReadAll(resp.Body)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    // save to cache asynchronously
    go func(key string, value []byte) {
        b.cache.Set(key, value)
    }(url, payload)

    // return 
    return payload, nil
}

type Fetcher struct {
    httpClient http.Client
    cache *Cache
}

func newFetcher() *Fetcher {
    return &Fetcher{}
}

type Cache struct {
    // not implemented
}

func (c *Cache) Get(key string) ([]byte, error) {
    // not implemented
    return nil, error.New("not implemented")
}
func (c *Cache) Set(key string, data []byte) error {
    // not implemented
    return errors.New("not implement")
}
```
PageLoader repeatably calls the member variable of the Fetcher. So much so that, if the implementation of Fetcher changed, it's highly likely that PageLoader would be affected. In this case, these two objects should be merged together as PageLoader has no extra functionality.

**Yo-yo problem:** The standard definition of this smell is when the inheritance graph is so long and complicated that the programmer has to keep flipping through the code to understand it. Given that Go doesn't have inheritance, you would think we would be safe from this problem. However, it is possible if you try hard enough, with excessive composition. To address this issue, it's better to keep relationships as shallow and abstract as possible. In this way, we can concentrate on a much smaller scope when making changes and compose many small objects into a larger system.

**Feature envy:** When a function makes extensive use of another object, it is envious of it. Typically, an indication that the function should be moved away from the object it is envious of. DI may not be the solution to this, but this smell does indicate high coupling and, therefore, is an indicator to consider applying DI techniques:

```go
func doSearchWithEnvy(request searchRequest) ([]searchResults, error) {
    // validate request  (envious of request)
    if request.query == "" {
        return nil, errors.New("search term is missing")
    }
    if request.start.IsZero() || request.start.After(time.Now()) {
        return nil, errors.New("start time is missing or invalid")
    }
    if request.end.IsZero() || request.end.Before(request.start) {
        return nil, errors.New("end time is missing or invalid")
    }

    return performSeach(request)
}

func doSearchWithoutEnvy(request searchRequest)  ([]searchResults, error) {
    err := request.validate()
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    return performSearch(request)
}
```

## Healthy skepticism

Continuous learning should be tempered with a healthy dose of skepticism. For each technique, I will layout the pros and cons, but I would ask you to dig deeper. Ask yourself the following:

- What is this technique trying to achieve?
- What would my code look like after I apply this technique?
- Do I really need it?
- Are there any downsides to using this method?

## Some notes

**Accepting interfaces and returning structs:** While accepting interfaces leads to nicely decoupled code, the returning structs might strike you as a contradiction. I know they did with me at first. While outputting an interface might feel like it's more loosely couple, it's not. Output can only be one thing - whatever you code it to be (interface is dynamic). Returning an interace is fine if that's what you nee, but forcing yourself to do so just ends up with you writing more code.

## Questions

1. What is DI?
2. What are the four highlighted advantages of DI?
3. What sorts of issues does it address?
4. What is it important to be skeptical?
5. What does idiomatic Go mean to you?