# Off-the-Shelf Injection

We are looking at dependency injection (DI) using a framework.

## Off-the-shelf injection with Wire

### Introducing providers

The documentation defines a provider as follows:

"A function can produce a value"

For our purposes, we can put it a different way - a producer returns an instance of a dependency.

```go
// Provider
func ProviderFetcher() *Fetcher {
    return &Fetcher{}
}

// Object being "provided"
type Fetcher struct {
}

func (f *Fetcher) GoFetch() (string, error) {
    return "", errors.New("not implemented yet")
}

// Providers can also indicate that they require dependencies to be injected by having parameters like this:
func ProviderFetcher(cache *Cache) *Fetcher {
    return &Fetcher{
        cache: cache
    }
}

// The dependencies (parameters) of this provider must be provided by other providers
func ProviderCache() (*Cache, error) {
    return cache, nil
}
```

It is important to note that when a provider returns an error, any injector that uses the dependency provided must also return an error. 

### Understanding injectors

Injectors are where the magic happens. They are functions that we (developers) define that Wire uses as a base for its code generation.

For example, if we want to have a function that can create an instance of our service's REST server, including initializing and injecting all the required dependencies, we can achieve this with

```go
func initializeServer() (*rest.Server, error) {
    wire.Build(wireSet)
    return nil, nil
}
```

```go
package main

import "fmt"

type Message string

type Greeter struct {
	Message Message
}

type Event struct {
	Greeter Greeter
}

func NewMessage() Message {
	return Message("Hi There!")
}

func NewGreeter(m Message) Greeter {
	return Greeter{
		Message: m,
	}
}

func (g Greeter) Greet() Message {
	return g.Message
}

func NewEvent(g Greeter) Event {
	return Event{
		Greeter: g,
	}
}

func (e Event) Start() {
	msg := e.Greeter.Greet()
	fmt.Println(msg)
}

func main() {
	message := NewMessage()
	greeter := NewGreeter(message)
	event := NewEvent(greeter)

	event.Start()
}

```

We are using the dependency injection design principle. In practice, that means we pass in whatever each component needs. This style of design lends itself to writing easily tested code and makes it easy to swap out one dependency with another.

### Using Wire to Generate Code

One downside to dependency injection is the need for so many initialization steps. Let's see how we can use Wire to make the process of initializing our components smoother

```go
func main() {
    e := InitializeEvent()
    e.Start()
}
```

```go
func InitializeEvent(phrase string) (Event, error) {
	message := NewMessage(phrase)
	greeter := NewGreeter(message)
	event, err := NewEvent(greeter)
	if err != nil {
		return Event{}, err
	}
	return event, nil
}
```

Wire inspects the arguments to the injector, sees that we added a string to the list of arguments (e.g., phrase) and likewise sees that among all the providers, NewMessage takes a string, and so it passes phrase into NewMessage.

### Conclusion

Let's summarize what we have done here. First, we wrote a number of components with corresponding initializers, or providers. Next, we create an injector function, specifying which arguments it receives and which types it returns. Then, we filled in the injector function, specifying which arguments it receives and which types it returns.

The example here is small, but it demonstrates some of the power of Wire, and how it takes much of the pain out of intializing code using dependency injection. Using Wire produced code that looks much like what we would otherwise write. There are no bespoke types that commit a user to Wire. Instead it's just generated code. We may do with it what we will. Finally, another point worth considering is how easy it is and add new dependencies to our component anywhere in the dependency graph and Wire will handle the rest.
