# Dependency Injection with Monkey Patching

Do you have code that relies on global variable? Do you have code that is dependent on the filesystem? Have you ever tried to test your database error handling code?

Monkey patching as a way to swap out dependencies during our tests and test in a manner that is otherwise impossible. It doesn't matter if these dependencies are objects or functions.

## Technical requirements

## Monkey magic!

Monkey patching is changing a program at runtime, typically by replacing a function or variable.

While this is not a traditional form of DI, it can be used in Go to facilitate testing. In fact, monkey patching can be used to test in ways that are otherwise impossible.

## Advantages of monkey patching

Monkey patching as a form of DI is very different from the other methods presented in this book in both implementation and affect. As such, there are some situations in which monky patching is either the only option or the only succinct.

**DI via monkey patching is cheap to implement**

In this book, we have talked a lot about decoupling, which is the idea that separate pieces of our code should be kept separate, even though they use/depend on each other. We introduce abstractions and inject them into each other.

Consider this function

```go 
func SaveConfig(filename string, cfg *Config) error {
    // convert to JSON
    data, err := json.Marshal(cfg)
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }

    // save file
    err = ioutil.WriteFile(filename, data, 0666)
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }

    return nil
}
```

How do we decouple this function from the os? How do we test how this function behaves when the file is missing?

We could replace the filename with *os.File or io.Writer, but that just pushes the problem somewhere else. We could refactor this function into a struct, change the call to ioutil.WriteFile into an abstraction, and then mock it. But that sounds like a lot of work.

With monkey patching, there is a fer cheaper option:

```go
func SaveConfig(filename string, cfg *Config) error {
    // conver to JSON
    data, err := json.Marshal(cfg)
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }

    // save file
    err = writeFile(filename, data, 0666)
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }

    return nil
}
// Custom type that allows us to Monkey Patch
var writeFile = ioutil.WriteFile
```

With one line, we have given ourselves the ability to replace writeFile() with a mock. That will allow us to test both happy path and error scenarios with ease.

**Allows us to mock other packages, without fully understanding its internals**

Monkey patching, like other forms of mocking, offers us the ability to not care about the internals of the dependency and yet be able to get it to behave as we need it to.

**DI via monkey patching has minimal impact on existing code**

**DI via monkey patching allows testing of globals and singletons**

```go
func Test(t *testing.T) {
    // monkey patching
    defer func(original *Rand) {
        // restore patch after use
        globalRand = original
    }(globalRand)

    // Swap out for a predictable outcome
    globalRand = New(&stubSource{})
    // end monkey patch

    // call the function
    result = Int()
    assert.Equal(t, 234, result)
}

// this is a stubbed implementation of Source that returns a predictable value
type stubSource struct {
}

func (s *stubSource) Int63() int64 {
    return 234
}
```

With monkey patching, we are able to test the usage of the singleton without any changes to the client code. To achieve this with other methods, we would have to introduce a layer of indirection, which in turn would necessitate changes to the client code.

## Applying monkey patching

One one the many things we would like to improve with our service is the test reliability and coverange. In this case, we will working on the data package.

```go
func TestData_happyPath(t *testing.T) {
    in := &Person{
        FullName: "Jake Blues",
        Phone: "01234",
        Currency: "AUD",
        Price: 123.45,
    }

    // save
    resultID, err := Save(in)
    require.Nil(t, err)

    // load
    returned, err := Load(resultID)
    require.NoError(t, err)

    all, err := LoadAll()
    require.NoError(t, err)
    assert.True(t, len(all) > 0)
}
```

This code has at least three major issues.

Firstly, we are only testing the happy path; we have not tested our error handling at all.

Secondly, the relies on the database. Some people will argue this is fine, and I do not want to add to that debate.

Lastly, we are testing all the functions together, rather than in isolation.

All of functions in the data packge depend on a global instance of *sql.DB, which represents a pool of a database connections. We therefore will be monkey patching that global variable and introducing a mocked version.

## Introducing SQL Mock

A mock library implementing sql/driver. Which has one and only purpose - to simulate any sql driver behavior in tests, without needing a real database connection.

```go
func SavePerson(db *sql.DB, in *Person) (int, error) {
    // person DB insert
    query := "INSERT INTO person (fullname, phone, currency, price) VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?)"
    result, err := db.Exec(query, in.FullName, in.Phone, in.Currency, in.Price)
    if err != nil {
        return 0, err
    }

    id, err := result.LastInsertId()
    if err != nil {
        return 0, err
    }

    return int(id), nil
}
```

This function is using a traditional form of DI to pass the database connection pool into the function. This allows us an easy way swap out the read database connection with a fake one.

```go
testDB, dbMock, err := slqmock.New()
require.NoError(t, err)
```

## Monkey patching with SQLMock

```go
func Save(in *Person) (int, error) {
	db, err := getDB()
	if err != nil {
		logging.L.Error("failed to get DB connection. err: %s", err)
		return defaultPersonID, err
	}

	// perform db insert
	query := "INSERT INTO person (fullname, phone, currency, price) VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?)"
	result, err := db.Exec(query, in.FullName, in.Phone, in.Currency, in.Price)
	if err != nil {
		logging.L.Error("failed to save person into DB. err: %s", err)
		return defaultPersonID, err
	}

	// retrieve and return the ID of the person created
	id, err := result.LastInsertId()
	if err != nil {
		logging.L.Error("failed to retrieve id of last saved person. err: %s", err)
		return defaultPersonID, err
	}

	return int(id), nil
}
```

We could refactor to this, and perhaps in the future we might, but at the moment we have almost no tests on this code and refactoring without tests is a terrible idea.  You might be thinking something similar to but if we write tests with monkey patching and then refactor to a different style of DI later, then we have to refactor these tests, and you are right.

```go
func TestSave_happyPath(t *testing.T) {
	// define a mock db
	testDB, mockDB, err := sqlmock.New()
	require.NoError(t, err)

	queryRegex := convertSQLToRegex(sqlInsert)
	mockDB.ExpectExec(queryRegex).WillReturnResult(sqlmock.NewResult(2, 1))

	// monkey patching starts here
	defer func(originalDB *sql.DB) {
		db = originalDB
	}(db)
	// replace db for this test
	db = testDB
	// end of monkey patching

	in := &Person{
		FullName: "NgocTD",
		Phone:    "01234",
		Currency: "AUD",
		Price:    123.45,
	}

	resultID, err := Save(in)
	require.NoError(t, err)
	assert.Equal(t, 2, resultID)
}
```

## Testing error handling

There are three possible errors we need to handle

- The SQL insert could fail
- Failure to get the database
- We could fail to retrieve the ID of the inserted record

## Reducing test bloat with table-driven tests

```go
func TestLoad_tableDrivenTest(t *testing.T) {
    scenarios := []struct{
        desc string // This is useful for adding to test error messages
        configureMockDB func(sqlmock.Sqlmock) // as we are testing how our code reacts to different responses from the database, this is where most of the magic happens
        expectedResult *Person // fairly standard, given the inputs and evn
        expectError bool // indicate whether we expect an error
    }{
        desc: "happy path",
        configureMockDB: func(mockDB sqlmock.Sqlmock) {
        }
    }
}
```

The use of table-driven tests here not only reduced the duplication in our test code, but it also has two other significant advantages. Firstly, it has distilled the tests down to inputs equals outputs, making them very easy to understand and very easy to add more scenarios.

Secondly, the code that is likely to change, namely the function call itself, only exists in one place. If that function altered to accept another input or return another value, we would have to fix it in one place, compared to once per test scenarios.

## Monkey patching between packages

We have looked at monkey patching a private global variable or function for the purposes of testing inside our data package. But what happens if we want to test other packages. Wouldn't it be nice to decouple the business logic layer from the database too?

```go
// Getter will attempt to load a person.
type Getter struct {}

// load person from the data layer
func (g *Getter) Do(ID int) (*data.Person, error) {
}
```

So how do we test this without the database? The first thing that comes to mind might be to monkey patch the database pool or the getDatabase() function as we did before. 

This would work, but it would be sloppy and pollute the public API for the data package with things that we don't want production code using, the very definition of test-induced damage. It would also do nothing to decouple this package from the internal implementation of the data package. 

Another aspect to consider is that we can make any alteration we want because the service is small and we own all the code. This is often not the case; the package could be owned by another team, it could be part of an external dependency, or even part of the standard library. It's better, therefore, to get into the habit of keeping our changes local to the package we are working on.

```go
type Getter struct {}

func (g Getter) Do(ID int) (*data.Person, error) {
    // load person from the data layer
    person, err := loader(ID)
    if err != nil {
    }

    return person, nil
}

// this function as a variable allows us to Monkey Patch during testing
var loader = data.Load
```

Now, we can intercept the calls with monkey patching, as show in the following code:

```go
func TestGetter_Do_happyPath(t *testing.T) {
    // inputs
    ID := 1234

    // mokey patch calls to the data package
    defer func(original func(ID int) (*data.Person, error)) {
        // restore original
        loader = original
    }(loader)

    // replace method
    loader = func(ID int) (*data.Person, error) {
    }

    // call method
    getter := &Getter{}
    person, err := getter.Do(ID)

    // validate expectations
    require.NoError(t, err)
}
```

Now, our test is not dependent on the database or any internal implementation details of the data package. While we have not entirely decoupled the packages, we have significantly reduced the number of things that must happen correctly for the tests in the get package to pass.

## When the magic fades

The potetial costs of monkey patching.

**Data races** We saw in our examples, that monkey patching is the process of replacing a global variable with a copy that performs in the way we need it to for a particular test. And that is perhaps the biggest problem. Swapping something global, and therefore shared, for something specific causes a data race on that variable.

By default, tests within a package are executed sequentially. We can reduce our test execution time by marking our tests with t.Parallel(). With our current tests of the data package, making the test as parallel would cause the data race to appear, resulting in unpredictable tests.

**Verbose tests** As you have seen in our tests, the code to monkey patch and restore can become rather lengthy.

**Obfuscated dependency relationship** This is not a problem with monkey patching itself but with the style of dependency management in general. In traditional DI, the dependency is passed in as a parameter, making the relationship explicit and visible.

## Summary

In this chapter, we have learned how to leverage monkey patching to swap out dependencies in our tests. With monkey patching, we have tested globals, decoupled packages, and removed our dependencies on external resources such as databases and the filesystem.
