# Dependency Injection with Constructor Injection

The most normal or traditional, constructor injection

## Constructor injection

When an object requires a dependency to work, the easiest way to ensure that dependency is always available is to require all users to supply it as a parameter to the object's constructor.

The real purpose of DI is not testing. The real purpose of DI is decoupling.

```go
type Mailer struct {
}

func (m *Mailer) Send(to string, body string) error {
    // send mail
    return nil
}

func (m *Mailer) Receive(address string) (string, error) {
    // receive mail
    return "", nil
}
```

We can introduce an abstraction by converting this into an interface based on the method signatures:

```go
// Mailer sends and receive emails
type MailerInterface interface {
    Send(string, string) error
    Receive(string) (string, error)
}
```

Hang on, we only need to send emails. Let's apply the interface segregation principle and reduce the interface to only the methods we use and update our constructor.

```go
type Sender interface {
    Send(string, string) error
}

func NewWelcomeSenderV2(in Sender) *WelcomeSenderV2 {
    return &WelcomeSenderV2{
        sender: in
    }
}
```

First, our code is now entirely self-contained. This means any bugs, extensions, tests, or other changes will only involve this package.

Second, we can use mocks or stubs to test our code, stopping us from spamming ourselves with emails and requiring a working email server for our tests to pass

Lastly, we are no longer tied to the Mailer class. If we wanted to change from a welcome email to an SMS or tweet, we could change our input parameter to a different Sender and be done.

By defining our dependency as an abstraction (as a local interface) and passing that dependency into our constructor, we have explicitly defined our requirements and given us greater freedom in our testing and extensions.

## Addressing the duck in the room

Go's support for implicit interfaces and how we can leverage it to perform dependency inversion and decouple objects. To those of you familiar with Python or Ruby, this may have felt like duck typing.

**If it looks like a duck, and it quacks like a duck, then it is a duck.**

**At runtime, dynamically determine an object's suitability based only on the parts of that object that are accessed**

Let's look at a Go example to see if it supports duck typing

```go
type Taker interface {
    Speak() string
    Shout() string
}

type Dog struct{}

func (d Dog) Speak() string {
    return "Woof!"
}

func (d Dog) Shout() string {
    return "WOOF!"
}

func SpeakExample() {
    var talker Talker
    talker = Dog{}

    fmt.Print(talker.Speak())
}
```

From our example, it looks like Go might suport duck typing, but there are a couple of problems:

- In duck typing, compatibility is determined at runtime; Go will check our Dog type implements Talker at compile time.
- In duck typing, suitability is only based on the parts of the object accessed. In previous example, only the Speak() method is actually used. However, if our Dog type did not implement the Shout() method, then it would fail to compile.

So if it's not duck typing, what is it? Something somewhat similar called structural typing. structural typing is a static system that determines suitability at compile time based on the type's structure. Go provide the safety of compile-time checking without the enforced formality of explicitly having to state the interfaces implemented.

## Advantages of constructor injection

**Separation from the dependency life cycle** Constructor injection, like most DI methods, spearate the life cycle management of the dependency from the object that it's being injected into. By doing this, the object becomes more straightforward and easier to understand.

**Easy to implement**

```go
type WelcomeSender struct {
    Mailer *Mailer
}

func (w *WelcomeSender) Send(to string) error {
    body := w.buildMessage()

    return w.Mailer.Send(to, body)
}
```

**Predictable and consise**

By moving the assignment of the dependency to the constructor, we are not only being explicit about our requirements, but we are also ensuring that the dependency is set and available to our methods. This is particularly true if we include a guard clause in the constructor. Without the constructor, each method might have to include a guard clause or risk throwing a nil pointer exception:

```go
type Car struct {
    Engine Engine
}

func (c *Car) Drive() error {
    if c.Engine == nil {
        return errors.New("engine is missing")
    }

    // use the engine
    c.Engine.Start()
    c.Engine.IncreasePower()

    return nil
}
```

Instead of, which is more concise:

```go
func NewCar(engine Engine) (*Car, error) {
    if engine == nil {
        return nil, errors.New("invalid engine supplied")
    }

    return &Car{
        engine: engine,
    }, nil
}

type Car struct {
    engine Engine
}

func (c *Car) Drive() error {
    // use the engine
}
```

**Encapsulation**

**Helps to uncover code smells**

It's an easy trap to add just one more feature to an existing struct or interface. As we saw during our earlier discussions of the single responsibility principle, we shoule resist urge and keep our objects and interfaces as small as possible. One easy way to spot when an objects has too many responsibilities is to count its dependencies. Typically, the more responsibilities an object has, the more dependencies is will accumulate. Therefore with all the dependencies clearly listed in one place, the constructor, it's easy to get a whiff that something might not be quite right.

## Applying constructor injection

This time we will be refactoring the REST package, starting with the Register endpoint (another endpoints: Get and List)

The Register endpoint has three responsibilities:

- Validate the registration is complete and valid
- Call the currency conversion service to convert the registration price to the currency requested in the registration
- Save the registration and the converted registration price into the database

### Decoupling from the dependency

### Improving test scenario coverage

The first thing we will do is break the dependence on the upstream service in the test. Then, we will proceed to add tests to cover additional scenarios that we couldn't cover before.

```go
func TestRegisterHandler_ServeHTTP(t *testing.T) {
    scenarios := []struct{
        desc                string
        inRequest           func() *http.Request
        inModelMock         func() *MockRegisterModel
        expectedStatus      int
        expectedHeader      string
    }
}
```

## Disadvantages of constructor injection

When it comes to DI, sadly there is no sliver bullet. Despite the utility of constructor injection, it cannot be used in all cases. This section covers the disadvantages and limitations of constructor injection.

**Can cause lots of changes**

When applying constructor injection to existing code, it can result in a lot of changes.

```go
func DealCards() (player1 []string, player2 []string) {
	player1 = append(player1, "name1")
	player2 = append(player2, "name2")

	return
}
```

As we saw in the previous section, to convert this to use constructor injection, we will have to do the following:

- Convert from a function to a struct
- Convert the dependency to something abstract by defining an interface
- Create a constructor
- Update all current usage of the function to use the constructor and to inject the dependency

Of all the changes, the one that is most concerning is the last. Changes that occur locally that is, in the same package, are easier to make and therefore less risky, but alterations to external packages, especially code that belongs to another team, are significantly more dangerous.

Other than being very careful, the best way to mitigate the risk is with tests. If the code has very little or no tests before the refactoring, it is benifical to create some first before starting any refactoring.

Di with monkey patching might be an attractive candidate to swap out any dependencies in those tests. Yes, these tests will need to be refactored or removed after changing to constructor injection, but there is nothing wrong with that. Having tests will ensure that the code is working before the refactor, and those tests will continue to be informative during code is working before the refactor, and those tests will continue to be informative during the refactoring. Or to put it a different way, the tests will help make the refactoring safer.

**Can cause initialization issues**

Constructor injection, we mentioned separating the object from the life cycle of its dependencies. This code and the complexity still exist, they've just been pushed higher up the call graph. While being able to work on these concerns separately is definitely an advantage, it does create a secondary problem: object initialization order.

**The dangers of overuse**

It is also very easy to overuse. The most obvious sign of overuse is excessive constructor parameters. Excessive constructor parameters can indicate that the objects has too many responsibilities, but it can also be a symptom of extracting and abstracting too many dependencies.

Before extracing a dependency think about encapsulation. What information do users of this object need to be aware of? The more information related to the implementation we can hide, the greater the flexibility we have to refactor.

Another aspect to consider is this: does the dependency need to be extracted, or can we leave it to configuration?

```go
type FetchRates struct{}

func (f *FetchRates) Fetch() ([]Rate, error) {
    // do http GET

    // parse response

    // Unmarshal to Rate
}
```

It is possible to abstract and inject \*http.Client, but is that really necessary? In fact, the only aspect that really needs to change is the base URI?

**Non-obvious requirement**

The use of a constructor in Go is not a required pattern. Given the code will likely crash rather spectacularly without the dependencies injected, this is unlikely to cause production issues, but it can be somewhat annoying.

Some teams have attempted to solve this problem by making the object private and only exporting the constructor and an interface

```go
func NewClient(service DepService) Client {
    return &clientImpl{
        service: service
    }
}

type Client interface {
    Do()
}

type clientImpl struct {
    service DepService
}

func (clientImpl) Do() {}
```

This approach does ensure that the constructor is used, but it does have some costs. Firstly, we now have to keep the interface and the struct in sync. Not hard, but it is extra work and can get annoying.

Seconly, some users are tempted to use the interface rather than defining their own locally. This results in tight coupling betwen the user and the exported interface. This coupling can make it more difficult to make additions to the exported API.

Consider using the previous example in another package

```go
package other

// StubClient is a stub implementation of sdk.Client interface
type StubClient struct{}

// Do implements sdk.Client
fucn (s StubClient) Do() {}
```

**Constructors are not inherited**

## Summary
