# Dependency Injection with Method Injection

We used a constructor to inject our dependencies. Doing so simplified our object and the life cycle of its dependencies. But what happens when our dependency is different for every request? This is where method injection comes in.

- Method injection
- Advantages of method injection
- Apply method injection
- Disadvantages of method injection

## Method injection

Method injection is everywhere. You probably use it every day and you don't even realize it.

```go
fmt.Fprint(os.Stdout, "Hello World")
```

This is method injection - the passing in of the dependency as a parameter to the request

When applying method injection, the dependencies are specific to the current invocation, and we will frequently find ourselves needing guard clauses.

Add a guard clause and return an error when io.Writer is not supplied

```go
func TimeStampWriterV2(writer io.Writer, message string) error {
    if writer == nil {
        return errors.New("writer cannot be nil")
    }
    timestamp := time.Now().Format(time.RFC3339)
    fmt.Fprintf(writer, "%s -> %s", timestamp, messasge)

    return nil
}
```

While this still looks and feels like regular, valid Go code, we now have an error that only happens when we, the programmer, make a mistake. A much better option would be a reasonable default, as shown in the following code:

```go
func TimeStampWriterV3(writer io.Writer, message string) {
    if writer == nil {
        // default to Standard Out
        writer = os.Stdout
    }

    timestamp := time.Now().Format(time.RFC3339)
    fmt.Fprintf(writer, "%s -> %s", timestamp, message)
}
```

This technique is called defensive coding. The central concept is that it's better to continue working, even with a degraded experience, than to crash.

## Advantages of method injection

**It is excellent with functions** Everybody loves a good function, particular those that follow SRP. They're simple, stateless, and can be highly reusable. Adding method injection to a function will increase its reusability by converting the dependency into an abstraction.

```go
func HandlerV1(response http.ResponseWriter, request *http.Request) {
    garfield := &Animal{
        Type: "Cat",
        Name: "Garfield"
    }

    // encode as JSON and output
    encoder := json.NewEncoder(response)
    err := encoder.Encode(garfield)
    if err != nil {
        response.WriteHeader(http.StatusInternalServerError)
        return
    }
    response.WriteHeader(http.StatusOK)
}
```

**Dependency acts as data**

Because method injection requires the user to pass in the dependency with each call, this has some interesting side-effect on the relationship between the dependency and the usage. The dependency becomes aprt in the request and can drastically change the results of the call.

```go
func WriteLog(writer io.Writer, messasge string) error {
    _, err := writer.Write([]byte(message))
    return err
}
```

A very innocuous and straightforward function, but see what happens when we supply a few different dependencies:

```go
// Write to console
WriteLog(os.Stdout, "Hello World")

// Write to file
file, _ := os.Create("my-log.log")
WriteLog(file, "Hello World!")

// Write to TCP connection
tcpPipe, _ := net.Dial("tcp", "127.0.0.1:1234")
WriteLog(tcpPipe, "Hello World!")
```

**Dependencies are request-scoped**

These dependencies, by definition, are being created and destroyed all of the time. Therefore, they are not good candidates for constructor injection or even monkey patching. We could, of course, create the object that uses the dependency every request too, but that would neither be performant nor always necessary.

```go
// LoadOrderHandler is a HTTP handler that loads orders based on the current user and supplied user ID
type LoadOrderHandler struct{
    loader OrderLoader // expensive to create
}

// ServeHTTP implements http.Handler
func (l *LoadOrderHandler) ServeHTTP(response http.ResponseWriter, request *http.Request) {
    // userID change in every request
    l.loader.Do(userID)
}
```

As an HTTP handler, the ServeHTTP() method will be called for every incoming HTTP request, LoadOrderHandler depends on OrderLoader, in which we will inject our implementation AuthenticatedLoader using constructor injection.

Use constructor injection for long-lived dependencies and method injection for request-scoped ones. In this way, we are not unnecessarily creating and destroying objects.

**Assists with immutability, statelessness, and concurrency** Objects that are stateless and/or immutable are less prone to concurrency-related problems. Method injection does not grant these features by itself but does make achieving them easier. By passing around the dependency, the ownership and scope of use are much clearer. Additionally, we do not need to concern ourselves with concurrent access to the dependency, as we would if it was a member variable.

## Applying method injection

## Disadvantages of constructor injection

**Adding parameter detracts from the UX**

```go
// Load people from the database
type PersonLoader struct {}

func (d *PersonLoader) Load(db *sql.DB, ID int) (*Person, error) {
}

func (d *PersonLoader) LoadAll(db *sql.DB) ([]*Person, error) {
}
```

This code works; it gets the job done. But it's annoying to have to pass in the database every time. Beyond that, there is no guarantee that the code that calls Load() also maintains the database pool.

Another aspect is consider is encapsulation. Does the user of these functions need to known that they depend on a database?

You want to load a person, and you know the ID of that person. You do not know (or care) where the data comes from. If you were designing the function for yourself, what would it look like:

```go
type MyPersonLoader interface {
    Load(ID int) (*Person, error)
}
```

**Limited applicability** As we have seen in this chapter, method injection is excellent with functions and request-scoped dependencies. While this use case does frequently crop up, method injection does not apply well to non-request-scoped dependencies, which is the bulk of use cases where we want to use DI.

## Summary

When it comes to extracting dependencies from existing code, for the purposes of testing, it might be the method that first comes in mind (do not want to introduce test-induced damage)
